STUCK IN NZ AFTER EIGHT FLIGHT CHANGES
A British family desperate to return home says their airline has cancelled or rescheduled eight flights.
Doug Burrows arrived in New Zealand with his wife Emma and daughter Issy, 9, in February for his mother's funeral. He has struggled to secure flights home following the Covid-19 lockdown.
After booking flights with Emirates on May 21, Burrows says the family, from Milton Keynes, have been given the runaround by the airline time and time again with a series of cancellations and postponements.
The latest instance came on August 28 when their September 3 flight from Auckland to London via Dubai was knocked back seven days.
Burrows could not understand how his family could be subjected to so many changes and said Emirates had been unhelpful.
Stranded at his father's house in Porirua, Burrows said the family was haemorrhaging money, and the stress was taking its toll.
"I've had to buy a mouthguard because I'm grinding my teeth," he said.
"We just want to get home. We paid extra and booked directly through Emirates, so we wouldn't have the hassle of being bounced around by travel agents. They haven't made any attempt to understand our situation - they just read off a script."
In anticipation for the September 3 flight, they booked accommodation in Auckland, and pre-travel swab tests and lodging for quarantine in England, all of which needed to be rescheduled. The airline had declined to assist them.
Emirates was approached for comment.
Adding to the Burrows' stress was an initial fear that Emma's and Issy's visas would not be renewed in time (Doug has New Zealand residency). An Immigration New Zealand spokeswoman confirmed the family were granted interim visas.
She said visa applications were assessed on a case-by-case basis and Immigration NZ would take into account the current coronavirus outbreak and any relevant travel restrictions.
The agency acknowledged it could be difficult to get out of the country with the uncertainty regarding the availability of flights and with many international borders closed.
The Government was considering options for holders of visitor visas who were in New Zealand, and an announcement was expected soon, she said.
