Calls grow for Fiji lockdown as outbreak hits new high
Calls for more action from the Fiji Government are growing louder, as authorities appear to be losing their grip on a rapidly-growing Covid-19 outbreak.
A new daily record of Covid-19 cases was announced yesterday after 94 new cases were recorded in 24 hours.
The country’s main hospital has been effectively sealed off, with Suva’s emergency department now operating from a field hospital at a stadium. The Fiji Government is now also unable to isolate cases at its facilities, and is telling positive people to instead self-isolate at home.
New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has called the situation in Fiji concerning, while health authorities there say the “serious developments” are impacting their ability to respond. Opposition and civil society groups say the escalating number of Covid-19 cases are a clear indication the Government is not in control of the crisis.
Despite calls for a lockdown, Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama has said there is no need to declare a state of emergency.
But the National Federation Party’s Biman Prasad said the Government must act now to avoid a disaster.
“This is a Government that has lost the ability to think straight and it appears that it’s totally stranded,” he said.
“Everyone must put out a proper strategy.”
Across the country, criticism of the response is becoming louder, with political opponents charging that the Government lacks a clear plan.
The latest outbreak started when a soldier working at a mandatory isolation quarantine facility contracted the virus from a couple who had returned from abroad.
Now, there are more than 500 active cases across the country, with clusters at the Colonial War Memorial Hospital, the Navy and military, a Suva supermarket, several villages and, now, the country’s main Covid-19 management team at the Ministry of Health, which has forced senior health leaders into isolation.
There are growing calls — particularly from some NGOs — for a sustained nationwide lockdown in Fiji to stamp out cases, something which authorities say would be incredibly difficult to pull off in Fiji.
On Sunday, while warning that high numbers could be expected for a while yet, Acting Permanent Secretary at Ministry of Health Dr James Fong said more stringent measures are not needed.
“Thanks to the massive step-up in the pace of our testing, we can continue to fight this virus in a targeted way,” he said.
“A way that allows Fijians to access essential services and allows the economy to function as normally and safely as possible.”
The Health Minister, Ifereimi Waqainabete, also said there was no need to get too alarmed at the current numbers, adding that most were coming from identified clusters.
“As long as they are coming from within the clusters and as long as we are not getting many new community cases, then we know that the programmes that are in place are working.”
New Zealand’s Foreign Minister, Nanaia Mahuta, said her officials were in close contact with counterparts in Fiji about what help could be offered.
Mahuta added that a donation of 500,000 doses of Covid vaccine was still on track to arrive in Fiji in July.
This week, Australia will send an additional 50,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine to Fiji.—RNZ
