Not one empty seat on flight
Air New Zealand passenger seated by a stranger on packed plane from US
Travellers heading overseas are being forced to break their bubbles because of the high demand for international flights after the covid-19 lockdown.
One passenger on an Air New Zealand flight to Los Angeles was shocked to discover she had been seated next to a stranger.
The plane was full and there was not a spare seat on the aircraft, the passenger wrote on Twitter.
“I love how they are like ‘keep two metres distance when boarding’ and then everyone is packed in,” the passenger said.
“There’s not one single empty seat on the plane. Completely unconscionable.”
A spokeswoman for Air New Zealand told the Herald on Sunday there were no recommendations about 2m social distancing on international flights.
However, on domestic flights passengers would have to be separated by at least 1m when more flights resume under alert level 2.
“Air New Zealand is following Ministry of Health and WHO guidance to ensure flights are safe for crew and our customers,” she said.
“All appropriate contract tracing measures are in place; we know where everyone is seated on the aircraft and we hold customers’ contact details.”
The airline was working to provide neighbour-free seating where possible on international flights, the spokeswoman said.
Because of the high demand for international travel as stranded nationals headed home after level 4, this was not always possible.
“Aircraft cabins also have hospital operating theatre-grade HEPA filters installed, which filter out viruses. Airflow is directed from the ceiling to the floor.”
Enhanced cleaning was also taking place on aircraft, cabin services had been amended and changes made to the boarding and disembarking process.
Domestically, just under half of Air New Zealand’s seats would be sold on turboprop flights and ticket sales on A320’s would be just under 65 per cent.
Under alert level 2, flights will resume to Queenstown, Invercargill and Blenheim in the South Island and Rotorua, Gisborne, Palmerston North, New Plymouth, Hamilton, Whangārei and Kerikeri in the north.
The airline is flying a bare-bones network to support essential service travel between Auckland and Christchurch, Wellington, Tauranga and Napier, as well as between Wellington-Christchurch, Wellington-Nelson and Christchurch-Dunedin.
