DREAM OF KIWI CLOSE TO HOME
Having kiwi roaming through backyards is an aspiration that will underpin New Zealand's conservation plan for the next 30 years.
The delight of having native wildlife close to home - as during the Covid-19 lockdown - is what Conservation Minister Eugenie Sage wants more New Zealanders to experience.
At the launch of Te Mana o te Taiao - the Aotearoa New Zealand Biodiversity Strategy in Wellington yesterday, she said her ambition was to have more New Zealanders living closer to nature. "We want a country where we have got nature in our backyards.
"What we need is to fundamentally change our relationship with nature, to recognise that we have grown our economy in the past by extracting and abusing nature. We need to change that and work to protect and restore - that is the basis of human wellbeing and that is the basis of a strong economy."
The last biodiversity strategy was produced in 2000 which, Sage said, lacked a strong te ao Maori perspective which the new one included.
Engagement with other stakeholders such as landholders, environmental groups and young people were important aspects of the strategy.
The strategy recognises nature is in crisis with 4000 threatened or at-risk species; diminishing wetlands, forests, grasslands; and the poor health of waterways.
It also acknowledges that historic and current legislation, policy and leadership have contributed to the situation.
It provides a roadmap for strategic direction, and considers New Zealand's flora and fauna, introduced species, habitat loss, climate change, pollution, and land and sea use. The strategy's three pillars are about getting the right systems in place, empowering action among stakeholders, and protecting and restoring New Zealand's biodiversity.
Forest & Bird chief executive Kevin Hague was at the launch and told Stuff the new strategy gave him hope for the future.
"What is different about this is the Government seems to be making the right connections with iwi and hapu but also private landowners. The connections are also there with local and regional government.
"Without being too rude to the last strategy ... a lot of it was about saying the right things," Hague said.
"This clearly does have the intent of action."
Hague said the Government's approach to the environment was changing, with natural values being considered alongside economic values.
