Cargo ship Covid advice: Pressure on for answers
Pressure is mounting on authorities to explain what happened with the flip-flopping health advice given to workers at Port of Tauranga.
More than 70 workers spent time on board the Rio de la Plata container ship, which was carrying crew infected with Covid-19. It emerged yesterday that Australian health officials believe the ship is the link to a snap lockdown in Cairns.
Maritime New Zealand received the alert about the ship but later allowed it in and the local health authority gave it permission to berth, but Customs then shut down operations.
Port workers were stood down, then later cleared to work, then stood down again.
Almost all workers tested on Monday have returned a negative test, according to the Ministry of Health.
“From 110 tests taken, negative results have now been returned from 109 workers at the Port of Tauranga. One is being retested as the result was inconclusive but is considered low risk,” the ministry said in a statement.
Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said how the transmission happened was under investigation.
The alert came because an Australian pilot who had been on board later tested positive for Covid.
Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young said the pilot developed symptoms on July 31 and thought he caught the virus on board the Rio de la Plata. “Now we’ve got this information from New Zealand about the ship that he piloted. He came off that ship on the 23rd of July and we think that’s probably where he acquired it,” she said.
“Then that taxi driver took the pilot to the airport on the 26th of July, and we know through whole genome sequencing that those two are linked, but that was before we thought he was infectious, which is why he wasn’t picked up on contact tracing.”
The ministry said “any Covid-19 transmission between the reef pilot and other individuals in Queensland after he disembarked from the Rio de la Plata container ship would have no impact on the public health assessment of the risk posed to the New Zealand public, which remains low”.
Back on board, foreign crew members on the ship remained asymptomatic and the vessel was still anchored at Tauranga yesterday.
Hipkins said it was difficult to tell whether any mistakes had been made regarding the changing advice from authorities and he was not impressed information was not shared promptly.—RNZ
