‘I’m telling on you’: Breach dobbers beat rule-breakers
Kiwis were more than happy to dob each other in to the authorities during the coronavirus lockdown but it appears many were too eager.
During the Covid-19 pandemic response in alert levels 4, 3 and 2, the public was encouraged to report restriction rule breakers.
Police enforcement statistics show there were 55,401 more breaches lodged than police actions taken.
Assistant Commissioner Sue Schwalger told the Herald it was important to note “we took an education-first approach” during the pandemic response.
Not all reports of breaches were for actual breaches, Schwalger said, with enforcement only used as a last resort.
The biggest ratio between breaches reported and actions taken were recorded at Whitianga police station where 259 reports were made to just one action taken.
It was a similar story for the nearby Coromandel police station, with the public reporting 77 breaches but police action taken just once.
Thames Coromandel mayor Sandra Goudie thought things went well throughout the lockdown considering the circumstances. However, she had hoped if it were to happen again that constituents would be nicer to one another.
“There was no need for disrespectful behaviour,” she said.
“I was disappointed that during the lockdown some people were not being nice to others.
“People were reporting others but they didn’t know what they were reporting, other than that they were seeing them doing things.
“I believe people were both scared and worried for themselves and other people so their reactions were a bit mixed,” she said.
Elsewhere, in Linton, north of Palmerston North, and Paihia, Northland, there were 80 reports from the public each but no police action. At the other end of the scale, Ranfurly Police Station recorded 13 police actions but fielded only three reports of breaches from the public.
The wider Auckland region had the most reports of violations per capita. Waitematā police district had the most reports from the public of breaches but had the lowest number of police actions per capita.
Elsewhere, Counties-Manukau had the most police actions due to breaches — both in the number of violations and violations per capita.
The majority of Health Act breaches came during alert level 4 with 5971 actions taken by police, compared to 999 in level 3 and 40 in level 2.
There were 62,969 breaches in total during alert levels 4, 3, and 2, with most being individual persons, followed by businesses and gatherings.
The majority of breaches were also made by people aged between 20 to 30 years with 40.7 per cent, followed by 30 to 40 years with 28.1 per cent.
Males were caught breaking the restrictions more than females — 72.9 per cent compared to 27 per cent — and 0.1 per cent were classed as unknown.
