FOUR MYSTERY CASES MAY CHAIN AUCKLAND
Contact tracers are urgently investigating four mystery Covid-19 cases where officials don't know how or when the person caught the virus.
Experts say the unsolved cases could keep Auckland in lockdown.
Director-General of Health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said there were two cases from one household of which genomic sequencing - where the virus' DNA is analysed to see how it moved from person to person - suggested there was another unknown person who may have passed the virus to them. Two unlinked Middlemore patients were also "being investigated very thoroughly", he said yesterday.
Overall, there were 29 cases which had yet to be linked to the cluster, including six of the 11 new community cases announced yesterday.
University of Otago epidemiologist Michael Baker, who advises the Government on Covid-19, said there needed to be a number of days with no unlinked cases, from which a new cluster could form, before Auckland could leave lockdown.
Cabinet is due to review pandemic restrictions in Auckland on Monday.
One of the unlinked Middlemore patients had no known exposure to Covid-19, no symptoms, and hadn't been at any locations of interest, despite testing positive on Thursday night. The other Middlemore patient, who said they had not been at a location of interest, tested positive last weekend.
Linking cases where there was a small likelihood of exposure and no clear links to an exposure location or person could "take some time", Bloomfield said.
"We continue to work closely with Auckland Regional Public Health to investigate fully the unlinked cases."
The two unlinked cases from the same household had also created new locations of interest. One of these was the Crowne Plaza Vaccination Centre, where about 600 people were vaccinated each day during the week in question.
People who visited the centre on August 23 should be tested for the virus, Bloomfield said. However, it is not linked to the nearby Crowne Plaza MIQ facility, because the last returnee left two days earlier.
"Everyone has to get tested immediately, whether you have symptoms or not," he said. "This is not part of contact tracing - this is part of the source investigation."
Earlier yesterday, Baker said the lockdown was working but there were still issues occurring "at the margins".
"It is being stamped out but will have this very long tail, [which is] problematic for Auckland," he said.
"Every time an unexplained case comes up, if the pressure is taken off, these could flare up."
Covid-19 modeller and University of Auckland professor Shaun Hendy said Cabinet's decision on Monday would rely on linking the cases.
