IT'S BACK ? Four new Covid-19 cases, community transmission ? Auckland in level 3, rest of country in level 2 ? Masks, testing stepped up as vigilance urged
Auckland will be pressed back into level 3 lockdown for 72 hours at midday today to stop the spread of Covid- 19, while the rest of the country goes into level 2 for three days.
The new lockdown comes after the Government confirmed the first community transmission in more than 100 days, with four cases of Covid-19 present in one family.
The Government is urgently trying to work out where the case came from, as no link to the border or overseas travel has been established.
The Government will use the next 72 hours in Auckland to roll out a testing blitz - in the order of tens of thousands of tests - to get a clear idea of the extent of any wider community transmission.
The first of the cases is a person in their 50s from South Auckland who had symptoms and has been tested twice.
At least one child has the virus.
The first case had a fever and a cough, and the person's partner also had "obvious symptoms", director- general of health Ashley Bloomfield told the country late last night. It was about four or five days from symptom onset to tests being carried out.
Two workplaces were involved well outside of South Auckland, meaning a city-wide lockdown was needed. The businesses were not customer-facing.
It also throws the general election campaign, and possibly even the September 19 date of the election itself, into question.
The cases end New Zealand's streak of 102 days without any evidence of community transmission. It is so far not known where the new Covid-19 cases came from and no connection to workers on the border has been established.
"We are asking people in Auckland to stay home and stop the spread," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said at a late-night press conference in the Beehive.
The geographic boundary of the Auckland lockdown will be the super city, with police operating roadblocks.
Gatherings of more than 10 people are again restricted in Auckland, while all schools and childcare facilities will be closed from this morning except for the children of essential service workers.
Ardern has advised that masks should be worn in places where physical distancing is difficult across the country.
She also refused to comment on what would happen to the date of the election but said the Electoral Commission had plans in place in case.
"I don't want to speculate on that at this point," Ardern said
She confirmed that she had informed National Party leader Judith Collins earlier in the evening.
Ardern is asking people to take a precautionary approach and monitor their symptoms. Everyone outside of Auckland should attempt to socially distance and should stay home from work if they or another member of their family are unwell.
Dr Bloomfield said the three days were needed to help assess the situation and carry out significant contact tracing. Officials are expecting other cases to emerge.
There would be pop-up clinics and longer hours at existing testing clinics in Auckland.
He said aged residential care facilities were advised to stop all visits earlier in the pandemic, and this advice was in place again. They should stop visits for the time being.
Auckland Mayor Phil Goff said another lockdown was always a possibility. "I understand that people are probably feeling a little bit scared, a little angry and a little confused right now.
"None of us wanted to go back into a lockdown but we always knew this was a very real possibility."
