Love in a time of pandemic
Young couple don’t let lockdown stop them exchanging vows, livestreaming wedding to guests
Covid-19 has taken so much, and Ariah and Ben McCarthy thought it was going to take their wedding, too.
But sometimes love is more powerful than a pandemic — young love, as well as the love of a determined mum for her 26-year-old “baby girl”.
Yesterday, the North Shore couple were married on the front lawn of their Bayview home.
They were joined only by the two others in their level 4 lockdown bubble, flatmates Alex Pereyaslavets and Jamie Broxup, and — standing more than 2m away — celebrant Ruth Montgomerie.
But the couple, who originally planned to wed at North Auckland’s Leigh Central function centre before 130 guests, were far from alone.
On a table sitting alongside hand sanitiser and a marriage licence, was a 360-degree video camera which livestreamed the ceremony to more than 100 family and friends in New Zealand and Australia who had originally planned to attend in person.
“I’m really happy,” Ariah McCarthy, a physics and science teacher at Papatoetoe’s Aorere College, said after the ceremony.
A neighbour’s dog barked during the ring exchange, and the couple had a close call with another neighbour turning on a noisy power tool as the ceremony ended.
But otherwise, “everything went so well”, McCarthy said.
The couple’s flatmates stepped up to help when their usual network of friends and family were unable.
But McCarthy said another person was also deserving of special thanks — her mum.
When large gatherings were banned, borders closed and self-isolation became our new normal last month, the couple made the decision to postpone their wedding a year.
But McCarthy’s mum, Naomi Peters, knew yesterday was a special date to her daughter. Two sets of her great-grandparents married on April 11.
She told McCarthy: “If you still want to go ahead with the wedding, we understand.”
After checking with Ben’s parents, who also gave their blessing, the couple decided they would wed on April 11.
Initially Montgomerie was told by authorities she could not officiate a wedding over video call. But when McCarthy shared the bad news with her mum, Peters was undeterred.
“I said we couldn’t do it and she said, ‘Why not?’ I was like, ‘It’s against the law, mum’. She said, ‘Well, I don’t think that’s fair’.”
That night, as McCarthy slept, Perth-based Peters’ fingers hit the keyboard. By morning, the determined mum had set up a change.org petition calling for a law change to allow online weddings, and dispatched dozens of emails, including to the highest office in the country.
“I went to the Labour Party website and I just emailed all the Labour MPs, including the Prime Minister, because I can and I did,” Peters said of her scattergun SOS.
“These kids just wanted to be married.”
Within hours, Births, Deaths and Marriages registrar-general Jeff Montgomery emailed to say that, as long as social distancing rules were followed and sanitiser provided, the wedding could go ahead.
“She’ll always be our baby girl. That’s just the love. Any of my kids, I’ll do anything to make them happy.”
McCarthy’s still in awe at her mum’s efforts to ensure the couple’s big day went ahead.
“I think it was her way of being there. Even though she’s across the ditch, she basically made this happen.”
While the couple exchanged rings and are now legally married, they held back some of their plans for next Easter’s full ceremony.
McCarthy decided not to wear her wedding dress — it’s outside her bubble, and she wants to save it for next year’s ceremony anyway.
The couple, who met during basic training for the Navy in 2016 and became engaged two years later, would also write their own vows next time. And she didn’t really consider walking down the front step to the yard the same as walking down the aisle, so that would be new, too, McCarthy said.
A virtual wedding reception of a few drinks followed the ceremony, before the couple’s flatmates cooked them a roast lamb dinner.
Their wedding had already raised the spirits of so many friends and family and she hoped it would bring a smile to strangers’ faces, too.
“It’s such an uncertain time, it’s nice to see something positive. It’s nice to see there are normal things happening, like a wedding.
“If we can keep some normality, I think that’s reassuring for people.”
Peters had already heard from many strangers and friends touched by the “happy love story”.
“These are the ripples of happiness that come from today.”
