39 DAYS CASELESS IN COVID-19 LOCKDOWN
Thirty-nine glorious days is how long it has been since Wairarapa had a new Covid-19 case. In Auckland the number is none.
A Stuff data analysis shows where the country's hot and cold Covid spots are.
Only Auckland, Counties Manukau, Waitemata, and Waikato have had cases in the past five days. Two of the new cases confirmed yesterday were from Auckland. The other was from Waikato.
Add Nelson Marlborough and Hawke's Bay to that list and you get the places that have had a new case in the past two weeks.
In Wellington the magic number sits at 21. In Christchurch, it is 17. Sitting at 39 days, Wairarapa is leading the pack. Hutt Valley and West Coast are close behind on 36-a-piece.
Carterton Mayor Greg Lang said Wairarapa had the dubious honour of having the first likely case of community transmission of the virus which spurred the community to action. "We hit the ground running," he said.
He would be keen to see some sort of regional - or even lower North Island bubble - if government rules allowed that. The fact that Wairarapa only had three or four roads in and out would make a regional bubble easy to police, he said.
South Wairarapa Mayor Alex Beijen said the region's low numbers - it has had just eight confirmed or probable cases - were a mixture of luck, a low population, isolation, and good management.
It did not appear the Government was keen on regional bubbles but, if he saw Wellington numbers start to rise, he would be eager to isolate from the capital.
Wellington City councillor Fleur Fitzsimons, who has the public health portfolio, said Wellington's long, clear run was thanks the efforts of residents and healthcare workers. "I think consideration of a regional bubble is premature at this stage.
"A regional bubble would have a number of complicated administrative and logistical matters that would need to be addressed before it could be implemented."
Tu Ora Compass Health medical director and Covid clinical lead Chris Fawcett said the whole Wellington region tested at high volumes early on. Wairarapa had the highest test volumes.
General practices moved quickly to virtual and tele-health appointments, which kept people away from medical centres.
