LEADER OVER-REACHED BY REJECTING BORDER FAILURE
Early in The Press Leaders Debate, National leader Judith Collins sought to blame the Government for the community outbreak of Covid-19 that ended up locking down Auckland.
Collins said it was a "failure of border protection that caused lockdown". Labour leader Jacinda Ardern immediately objected, saying it was "completely incorrect to say that there was a failure that led to that outbreak, we have never been able to identify the source."
Ardern is correct that we don't definitively know how Covid-19 got into the community again. But it is overwhelmingly likely that it came through the border. There are two credible alternatives to the border theory.
First, that Covid-19 was in fact still in the community throughout the 102 days until August 11 the country believed it had no cases. There were 357,116 Covid-19 tests carried out in this period, and not a single one returned as positive. Director- general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield told Newshub he's "very confident" the virus did not lay dormant in the community throughout this time.
The other possible link, via a surface at the Americold Warehouse, has been ruled out after an extensive investigation.
This led Bloomfield to conclude: "It must have been introduced through the borders, either at the airport, or at a managed isolation facility, or possibly through one of the ports."
Ardern gave herself some wriggle room by saying a "failure" could not be blamed. Her point there was that a list of failures mentioned by Collins - particularly the fact many border staff were not being tested - cannot be definitively blamed for the outbreak. Indeed, genome testing has not linked the Covid-19 strain found in the community to any of those found in managed isolation, although there aren't useable samples for every case.
Most reasonable people would agree that any Covid-19 getting into the community itself constitutes a failure of the wider system. Even if we can never know for sure that testing more border workers would have stopped this outbreak, it doesn't change the fact that the overall system set up to stop this happening did not.
Which means it is stretching things quite a bit to say it is "totally incorrect" to say a border failure caused the second lockdown.
- Stuff is tackling the big debates and key issues of the election campaign in The Whole Truth, a fact-checking project.
