Hardly an abject failure
We are bombarded daily with negative commentary belittling the Government’s Covid-19 response by many columnists who, in my opinion, are notable for their right-of-centre view of the world. One of the latest published in Herald Premium contained a sub-title describing the Government’s efforts as an “abject failure”.
True or false? Here are some facts. Converting current rates of infection in some countries to the NZ population, this is what Covid-19 would look like here every week: 17,000 cases, 55 deaths per week (based on UK rate); 10,500/165 (USA); 7950/30 (Ireland); 2900/20 (Australia). These are orders of magnitude higher than our weekly rate of 202 cases, 0-1 deaths. And some of these countries have only just come out of six months of severe lockdown. Even Taiwan, oft-touted for its gold standard contact-tracing system had 750 deaths May-July this year when Delta struck there.
Abject failure? The results would indicate otherwise.
John Gibbs, Mt Albert.
Living environments
David Milner (NZ Herald, October 7) writes about Belgium’s death rates from Covid as if they demonstrate the difference between New Zealand’s “hard” mitigation approach and some other “hands-off” alternative.
But Belgium imposed the same relatively hard mitigation strategies as most nations. It is obvious that there are natural and environmental factors that make the primary difference in outcomes. It is now obvious some nations and states can achieve better outcomes with minimal restrictions, than unluckier nations with significant restrictions. That is not to say that they could not have done better still, but it should be recognised.
It should also be considered and analysed whether some parts of the world have predominant housing and environmental conditions that result in worse Covid illnesses under lockdown conditions than without.
The assumption that spread was by contact and large droplets, rather than aerosol buildup in indoor air, has resulted in very badly targeted mitigation strategies, so it is no wonder there is minimal correlation with success.
Philip G Hayward, Naenae.
Liquor subsidy
Instead of the hospitality industry expecting the Government to help all the time, why doesn’t it ask the alcohol industry to contribute?
Alcohol sales have increased by 500 per cent during lockdowns, so it has done very well out of Covid 19.
The Government should increase the tax on alcohol (which would benefit all of society) and use that income for the increased pressure on our health services.
Roger Hall, Takapuna.
Status signs
John Harvey’s suggestion (NZ Herald, October 7) of signs at commercial premises displaying their staff’s Covid status is excellent. We all understand the food safety classification for restaurants so why not have a similar grading system for Covid?
A rating of A+ would indicate all staff fully vaccinated, D would indicate none. Signs would be prominently displayed next to the Covid QR codes and of a similar size.
We all have a right to know if we and our children are entering hazardous places such as building sites, so why not shops, food outlets and especially restaurants?
This would also encourage vaccination uptake amongst reluctant staff with the additional pressure then coming from employers and customers.
Alastair Brickell, Whitianga.
It’s a date
Great date-setting moments in history:
Angry politicians: “We demand you set a date for the end of this war!” Churchill: “Yes, September 7, 1940.”
La Palma population: “What date is this lava flow going to end?” Vulcanologist: “On September 20, at 2pm exactly.”
Angry populace in the year 1337: “Another bloody war! What date is this going to end?” The kings of Europe: “Relax — It’ll only be about 100 years.”
Angry noble in 1066: “Your Majesty, exactly when is this French invasion going to end?” Harold: “Aaaaargh!”
Angry Nationals in 2021: “Prime Minister, we demand you set a date for…”
Jill Hadfield, Glendowie.
Taxed but voteless
If the opponents of the “Make it 16” campaign (which is advocating for the voting age in New Zealand to be reduced from 18 to 16) are truly sincere that 16- and 17-year-olds shouldn’t have the right to vote until they are 18, then I would expect them to be equally as vocal in arguing that young people should not start to pay taxes on their earnings until they turn 18.
Whichever age these two civic rights and responsibilities are set at, the Government must make the age of beginning to vote and to pay taxes exactly the same.
Bradley Mihaljevich, South Titirangi.
China’s grip
In full support of David Stevenson’s opinion piece “Arming the new Boeing P-8A” (NZ Herald, October 8). He brings our defence requirements into sharp focus, not only because of China’s threatening posture towards Taiwan, but because of our exclusion from the Aukus agreement. Our status as “friend, not ally” with the US will only perpetuate “our longstanding record of bludging on our allies”.
Complicating matters further is the 2019 New Zealand/China defence agreement. At the time of signing, vice-chairman General Xu Qiliang said our two militaries will look to explore new areas of partnership and cooperation, which was amplified by General Wei Fenghe’s desire “to deepen strategic mutual trust… and forge even closer defence relations.” In this regard, what will the NZ Government’s position be if General Xu asks if we would host a visit from a (diesel-powered) naval ship in the forging of closer defence relations? Such a visit would weigh heavily on our friendship with Australia and makes the decision to arm the P-8As even more vital.
Richard Buddle, Karaka.
Park bungle
What bureaucratic boffin decided in his/her infinite wisdom to shut the gates into Cornwall Park? After seven weeks of lockdown, we are now allowed to meet people in parks for picnics, etc. Restrictions apply.
Forbidding vehicle access means that the vehicles still arrive but cause mayhem in the surrounding residential streets. Not to mention mothers with bikes, scooters, prams and picnic essentials struggling for hundreds of metres to gain entry to the park and then several more hundred metres up a path to the meeting spots.
Oh I know, it is the same boffin that authorised all the seats to be taped off so there are no seats available when they finally get there.
Russell Bond, Remuera.
Decline in insects
Forget the Covid crisis. The real crisis is the destruction of the planet. To cite just one example — it seems likely that insects have declined by 75 per cent or more in the last 50 years.
Insects pollinate three-quarters of our crop types. This will have an enormous impact on food security, even before rising temperatures and increased floods/droughts and fires are factored in.
We need to stop our endless mindless consumerism, our pollution and our complete destruction of ecosystems now or it will simply be too late.
Allison Kelly, Mt Roskill.
Relief from guilt
Like your correspondent, the retired Catholic school principal David Tennett (NZ Herald, October 7), I was born into the fear and guilt of both the Roman Catholic and Open Brethren churches. Until I enjoyed a korero with the odd atheist and agnostic.
Their premise was, “how can a loving God, further punish his flock for sinning through disobedience”?
At 95 years of age, I have total freedom of worrying about my flawed soul, while enjoying trying to better look after our planet that sustains us.
Pat Magill, OBE, Napier.
Well served
I thoroughly enjoyed the article (NZ Herald, October 8) by Michael Burgess featuring New Zealand tennis player Kelly Evernden.
It provided a heartwarming insight into the real joy of a successful athlete dedicated to his sport without necessarily becoming an icon.
John Norris, Whangamatā.
