ECONOMIST TOUTS SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST
Businesses should be allowed to fail over the coming months because, if the country is not pursuing an elimination strategy for Covid-19, it does not make sense to try to save every one, one economist says.
The elimination strategy for Covid has proved a strong one for the economy over the past 18 months. Although the first "short, sharp" level 4 lockdown caused gross domestic product (GDP) to shrink by 12.2 per cent in the June quarter last year, it rebounded 14 per cent in September. Another jump in June this year, of 2.8 per cent, was hailed as New Zealand "outperforming".
But as the Government eased restrictions in Auckland despite the Delta variant of Covid-19 in the community, commentators noted that the country was moving from an elimination strategy to one of suppression. That could change the way the economy responds, too.
Economist Shamubeel Eaqub said there was still a lot of pent-up demand that would be unleashed on businesses when Aucklanders were able to move freely around the city again. That had already happened in parts of the country that had returned to level 2, he said.
"But I think the reality if you look at countries like Singapore, living with the virus essentially means level 2.5.
"It's not just restrictions - what's missing in the conversation of what happens next is there is fear. When you see cases rising, the number of people in hospital rising, the number of people dying, that creates a change in behaviour. That might be persistent, we don't know."
The experience of other countries was that fear would come and go, he said. People would stay home for a while, then grow tired of that and go out. Then someone they knew might get sick and they would return to limited movement.
"In the UK despite their 'freedom day' people are not going to the office in the CBD. Some people have come back but not everyone. Singapore is still suggesting people work from home if they can. It's having a huge impact on what the city centre looks like and the biggest impact on retail and hospitality."
That effect would be seen in other parts of the country that did not have cases if the infection spread, he said. But he said the Government should not be called on to step in to save businesses.
"They wanted to open up, this is what opening up looks like. In reality what we need now is for a lot of businesses to fail so the ones that survive can survive properly.
"At the moment essentially there are too many businesses vying for a smaller and smaller wallet."
