Jamie Morton: Science Reporter
How long will Auckland be in lockdown?That partly depends on Aucklanders continuing to play their part under level 4 and not giving the virus a chance to spread. Mathematically, there’s the all-important “R” value, which is simply how many people are being infected by each positive case of Covid-19. Before lockdown, Delta’s R, potent as it is, was sitting above six. When the number is high, the virus spreads faster. With the virus now having been starved for weeks, we can safely assume it’s well below one. Perhaps even as low as 0.4, as current modelling shows. The Auckland-centred outbreak might now be eliminated within weeks, provided we keep the pressure on it. When will Auckland join the rest of the country at “Delta Level 2”? That depends on officials’ appetite for risk — and with Delta, that tolerance level will be extremely low.
It’s also worth noting that more than 20 community cases during this outbreak haven’t been epidemiologically linked — and that will make officials nervous. It only takes one rogue case to reignite an outbreak.Will life go back to normal when we come out?As we’ve already seen around the rest of New Zealand, life even at level 2 is much different than it used to be. It now means masking up in most public places — including supermarkets and shopping malls — and the measure is also recommended, but not required, in schools. Scanning and record-keeping are now required in a lot of settings. A bar or restaurant can’t have more than 50 people seated at a time. Experts have gone as far as arguing that these busy venues shouldn’t have even been allowed to open under the new level 2. When Auckland’s lockdown finally lifts, it’s likely that this is what people can expect. And at level 1, we might anticipate other tweaks that mean “normal” life in New Zealand won’t be the same.Can we still eliminate Covid — or are we going to have to learn to live with it?In New Zealand, and for the time being, yes we can, as the response to this outbreak is showing. But that’ll be increasingly tough in the age of Delta. A few quick reasons to stick with the strategy: it’s given New Zealand a cumulative Covid-19 death rate nearly 250 times lower than the OECD average, and helped protect our economy. Going by GDP over the first five quarters of the pandemic, New Zealand’s was the sixth-best performing in the 38-nation club. On top of that, it’s kept our health system from being overloaded and spared Kiwis the long-term problems that follow infection. Epidemiologists say there’s no reason our strategy can’t hold against even Delta, so long as we go as hard as we can while we’re still vaccinating. South Australia, Queensland, Taiwan, Hong Kong, China and Singapore have already proven it’s possible. And going forward, as coverage rates rise, the strategy can be changed. It’s a trump card that we shouldn’t throw away — and we’d be foolish to go the way of other nations like the UK if we don’t have to. In the longer term, and globally, however, worldwide eradication is probably next to impossible. That’ll likely mean that the virus could become endemic here when we reopen — albeit with some protection from high vaccination rates, hopefully.Is vaccination the answer?It’s part of the answer. Much has been said of Australia’s 70 to 80 per cent vaccination threshold — a milestone at which politicians across the Ditch have promised restrictions can begin to be lifted. It’s a federal game-plan that states like New South Wales and Victoria are now having to embrace after Delta outbreaks have taken elimination off the table. But that won’t mean there won’t be other controls in place across Australia, or that it’ll be like living in 2019. Here in New Zealand, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has repeatedly pushed the line that the Government will review the options once it has completed its vaccination drive. But again, it’ll be unlikely this will spell complete freedom. Modelling studies tell us that achieving population immunity against Delta is unlikely, given this would require uptake among all Kiwis to be close to 100 per cent. Currently, the shot is only approved for people older than 12 — and willingness to get the vaccine among the population has been sitting at only 80 per cent.When will we reopen our borders?At this point, that’s tough to say. As the Delta outbreak hit, the Government had already been in the process of opening a self-isolation trial for vaccinated travellers to prepare for a “phased resumption” of quarantine-free travel. It’s worth noting that Sir David Skegg’s group found that allowing more quarantine-free travel would raise the risk of Covid-19 entering the country again — and even with high vaccination levels, there’d still be some clusters of infection and occasional large outbreaks. By sticking with elimination, we might hope these could be stamped out without more lockdowns, and by public health and social measures such as mass testing, rapid tracing and isolation of contacts, as well as physical distancing and mask-wearing where appropriate. Simply throwing open our borders and letting the virus rip doesn’t seem a good option, even in the long term. One modelling paper found that even if we vaccinated nine in 10 Kiwis, doing this led to more than 11,000 hospitalisations — and more than 1000 deaths — in only two years. So the most important question might not be when we reopen, but how.
