‘Extremely unlikely’: Experts doubt chances of level 3
Three new cases linked to Middlemore may mean longer Auckland lockdown
Three people, including a baby, who were at Middlemore Hospital in recent days have tested positive for Covid-19.
The Ministry of Health’s announcement late last night have experts fearing that Auckland faces a longer lockdown.
A woman who had been at the hospital’s birthing unit on Wednesday returned a positive result after developing symptoms subsequent to being discharged.
And a parent and their 5-month-old baby who were at the hospital’s Kidz First Emergency Department on Friday afternoon have also returned positive Covid-19 results.
The ministry said the woman had been in Middlemore Hospital’s Birthing and Assessment Unit on Wednesday for a routine antenatal assessment and developed symptoms the next day. She had a Covid-19 test, which was positive. She is now in a managed isolation facility.
The Counties Manukau District Health Board is now establishing how many patients and staff will be deemed contacts.
The 5-month-old baby was identified as being symptomatic by clinical staff in triage.
The parent and their child were discharged and advised to isolate at home.
Last night’s announcement came on a day when 23 new cases were announced — double the 11 from Friday. Epidemiologist Michael Baker said the earlier increase may not have automatically ruled out a change in alert levels of Auckland, but was less confident when the three Middlemore-related cases were revealed. “These unexpected cases, all of them really do need to be resolved, and we need to have several days with no cases like this.”
The fact the cases were detected in people who were, or had visited, a hospital wasn’t surprising, as they were among the few places the public could go during level 4, he said.
In fact, hospitals could be a place for targeted Covid-19 testing, if that was introduced beyond essential workers crossing Auckland’s borders.
Nine cases yesterday were yet to be linked to the outbreak, bringing to 36 the number of unlinked cases, and experts believe several days of no such cases are needed for Cabinet to be confident in moving the City of Sails out of lockdown.
Excluding last night’s three Middlemore-linked cases, 902 cases are now linked to the outbreak — 885 in Auckland (279 have recovered) and 17 in Wellington (10 have recovered).
Nineteen people are in hospital: four at North Shore, seven at Middlemore and eight at Auckland City. Four are in intensive care or high dependency units.
A ministry spokesperson said volatility in case numbers was likely at this point, with day five and day 12 tests due for close contacts and further investigations being carried out into any unlinked cases.
Cabinet will tomorrow debate whether to shift Auckland out of alert level 4.
Baker said the weekend’s jump in cases was not unexpected. He cited multiple reasons why yesterday’s total could have been larger, including the possibility people in larger bubbles with positive cases were now symptomatic.
Baker also said asymptomatic people could be unknowingly spreading the virus at essential workplaces — as evidenced by supermarkets and laundromats announced as locations of interest recently.
He conceded moving Auckland to alert level 3 early this week was “extremely unlikely”.
“I think we’re going to have to see low numbers consistently for several days and that we’re not seeing a pattern of any more unexpected cases.
“[An alert level shift] is certainly not impossible — overall, things are going in a very positive direction.”
Infectious diseases modeller Mick Roberts said he was disappointed to hear yesterday’s case numbers had increased from Friday.
“I’m looking forward to the numbers decreasing again during the week, hopefully,” Roberts said.
“I’d be surprised if Cabinet decided we could reduce the alert level in Auckland in the next few days.”
Roberts, a Massey University mathematical biology professor, speculated Auckland could be kept in lockdown for several days longer than the rest of the country as a precautionary measure, with the assurance that if tests remained negative, the region would shift to level 3.
