Ministry, principals weigh back-to-school options
Schools have been told to prepare to reopen for “some, but not all” students on April 29, but principals are still uncertain what reopening will look like.
The Ministry of Education has sent a bulletin to schools saying that “a hybrid model of distance learning and on-site learning is very likely at least in the early stages” after the coronavirus lockdown ends.
“We want to reassure you that following any announcement, you will have some time to prepare for physically reopening your school or early learning service to welcome back on site your staff and some, but not all, of your children/students,” it said.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has said Cabinet will decide next Monday whether the lockdown will end as originally planned at midnight on April 22.
“Assuming the alert level does change, current planning assumptions are that you will have Thursday, April 23 and Friday, April 24 to fully access your site and undertake a property inspection and necessary maintenance and cleaning,” the ministry has told schools.
“Monday April 27 is a public holiday (Anzac Day observed) and Tuesday April 28 will be a staff-only day.
“We therefore anticipate Wednesday April 29 would be your first day with some of your students/children able to attend in person. “Early learning centres might not need all of this time.”
Education Minister Chris Hipkins told TVNZ’s Q&A teachers might return to schools before their students.
The children of essential workers were “clearly a priority” so that their parents could go to work.
He said schools would still have to enforce social distancing, and “some kids may be in school only part of the time and working from home some of the time”.
Some teachers who were older or had health conditions making them more vulnerable to Covid-19 might still be working from home, and reopening could vary for different age groups.
Principals’ Federation president Perry Rush said it was clear that there would be “some sort of interim reality” after the lockdown ends before all schools and early childhood services reopen.
“One could be, at level 3, a child of essential workers would be the most likely [to get back to school]. That would support some industry to be back in place in terms of releasing parents to go to work.
“The other obvious one is the potential for senior secondary, students engaged in national qualifications, to be back in front of teachers.”
Hipkins said last week contracts with TVNZ and Māori Television to operate educational TV from 9am to 3pm daily from this Wednesday were for “at least a month at this stage”.
