BIG BUSINESSES HOLD UP AFTER LOCKDOWN
The impact of Covid-19 on the businesses of several property companies on the New Zealand sharemarket has been contained, for now, a new analysis says.
A report by investment managers Forsyth Barr says earnings from the listed property companies for the 2020 financial year were generally stable. The rent relief provided by the companies to their tenants through the lockdown was offset by lower interest rates and depreciation benefits.
The companies in the analysis included Kiwi Property, Investore, Argosy, Stride Property, Precinct Properties, Asset Plus, Augusta Capital, Goodman Property, Property for Industry, and Vital Healthcare.
Rent collections for April and May ranged between 63 per cent for Kiwi Property to 90 per cent for Property for Industry and Goodman, the report, titled The Road to Recovery, said.
Where sub-sector detail was provided, office and industrial properties collected more than 90 per cent of their rents while retail rents collected had been 50-60 per cent.
The Government's $40 million support package through a temporary Property Law Act change and compulsory arbitration for unresolved rent reduction disputes would have little impact on the listed property companies, the report, written by Rohan Koreman-Smit and Ashton Olds, said.
The package was not significantly different from what the listed property companies had been offering tenants, and those tenants who had already agreed on rent relief with landlords were not able to renegotiate.
Development spending across the property sector had been put on hold unless tenant commitment could be found.
Goodman paused $60m of speculative projects. Kiwi Property had slowed progress on a second Sylvia Park office tower. Argosy had deferred redevelopment projects at 101 and 105 Carlton Gore Rd, Auckland.
Precinct Properties has deferred the $300m hotel, office and hospitality development, called One Queen Street.
But it will start construction of Wellington's Bowen Campus stage two office development soon with pre-committed leasing to EY and Fujitsu secured.
Tenants were now back trading and support for tenants was tracking in line with or below Forsyth Barr's expectations. Companies' guidance on profits for the 2021 financial year pointed to flat underlying earnings rather than higher profits.
Rent support provided to tenants had been largely towards the lower end of what companies had indicated.
Support for tenants was mostly during alert levels 4 and 3, with less from level 2.
Kiwi Property said 40 per cent of its tenants had taken up the support offered.
"We understand that a number of Australian-owned retailers who had been withholding rent until government measures were announced are now more willing to negotiate with landlords."
But the report warned worse might be to come and retailing was a worry.
"The full year impact potentially includes higher vacancy from tenant fall-overs which are yet to materialise," it said.
"Pent-up demand has driven strong initial post-lockdown trading outcomes for retailers, however, the longer term trend remains uncertain."
There were still questions about medium term profits, occupancy and capitalisation rates (income as a percentage of the original capital cost), the report said.
