Tamaki plans picnic ‘protest’
Church leader Brian Tamaki made a first court appearance yesterday on charges he illegally attended and helped organise a crowded lockdown protest at Auckland Domain, and was granted bail — with conditions.
One condition required Tamaki and co-defendant Paul Craig Thompson not to “organise or attend any protests in breach of any Covid-19 level requirement”.
Another forbids the pair from using the internet “for the purpose of organising, attending or encouraging non-compliance with the Covid-19 Public Health Response Act 2020”.
But within hours of the hearing, the Destiny Church founder issued a statement on social media that appeared to push the boundaries — promoting a follow-up protest at the same spot this weekend.
“Our Prime Minister has told us it’s safe to picnic, therefore I will be attending a picnic with my family at the Auckland Domain on this same Saturday with my bubble, adhering to the current Covid-19 restrictions, wearing my mask, but also at the same time exercising my right to peacefully protest,” he said.
“I am not organising this Families Freedom picnic, I will leave that to The Freedoms & Rights Coalition team who are quite capable.”
Tamaki, 63, and fellow Destiny member Thompson, 57, attended an Auckland District Court hearing via audio-video link and pleaded not guilty to the charges.
If convicted, they could each face up to six months’ prison and a fine of up to $4000.
Most of the roughly 30-minute hearing cannot be reported due to suppression requirements of the Bail Act, but the judge did briefly mention the defence perspective.
“The defence is that the gathering organised at the outdoor place was permitted within the current Covid-19 alert level requirements ... and accordingly the matter will have to proceed to a judge-alone trial in that respect,” Judge Gibson said.
The case will likely return to court in January.
An estimated crowd of 1000 to 2000 people gathered at Auckland Domain on October 2 — despite pleas from officials to call off what could have been a super-spreader event.
Under alert level 3 restrictions at the time most non-essential gatherings that involved the mixing of bubbles were banned. Lockdown rules have since eased in the city.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern had characterised the event as a “slap in the face” for all Aucklanders.
Auckland Mayor Phil Goff said the gathering was a “kick in the guts”.
Tamaki believes his case will strengthen the Bill of Rights “so no further laws passed by this government can override our freedoms and rights”.
