Most travellers ditch masks in level 1
It’s estimated only 30 to 40 per cent of Auckland Transport passengers are using face coverings at alert level 1.
One of the nation’s top Covid-19 experts says an opportunity was missed not to retain mask use in specific settings after the latest lockdown.
There are no requirements for people to wear a mask on public transport at level 1 but it is encouraged, the Ministry of Health says.
Auckland Transport (AT) spokesman Mark Hannan said less than half of its passengers are using face coverings at level 1 but usage varied across the network.
“We want all Aucklanders to feel safe on our buses, trains and ferries and face coverings can help people feel confident about going out.”
University of Otago epidemiologist Professor Michael Baker hoped the Government would go to alert level 1.5 to further socialise mask use.
“ It does seem like a missed opportunity to go straight to level 1 and not retain mask use in specific settings.
“We wanted to retain some restrictions on how the virus could be transmitted if there were some remaining cases.”
Masks and face coverings are most useful when there is community transmission of Covid-19, a Ministry spokesperson said.
It is not mandatory to wear a mask or face covering at level 1 but people are encouraged to when they cannot maintain physical distancing from others.
The Ministry spokesperson said they constantly reviewed the evidence around face coverings as part of wider public health measures.
On a full flight from Wellington to Auckland yesterday morning, a Herald employee said no one wore face coverings, including the flight attendants.
And on a bus from the North Shore to Auckland CBD, only one passenger and the driver were wearing face coverings, said a Herald reporter.
AT drivers are encouraged to wear masks but it is up to drivers whether they do, Hannan said.
Buses and trains are spot-checked, with surfaces sanitised and an enhanced cleaning regime including antimicrobial protection fogging across its facilities and fleet.
AT recommends passengers scan QR codes with the NZ Covid Tracer app and register their AT HOP cards to help with contact tracing.
