ALL THAT GLITTERS ISN'T A WASTE OF PUBLIC MONEY
With the Government's handling of Covid-19 being a major issue this election, you can understand why the arts hardly rate a mention. But considering that many Kiwis spent lockdown reading books, listening to music, and accessing plays and concerts online, it's a pity the arts have been largely ignored during this campaign.
Judith Collins added little by dully declaring that photography and media studies are "woke" subjects. The Taxpayers' Union - which represents a tiny proportion of actual taxpayers - complained about the state funding of artists by selectively publicising recent Creative New Zealand (CNZ) grants recipients.
When you look at the millions of dollars used to bail out our private "public" transport operators and the moribund public-private Transmission Gully project, you would think an organisation dedicated to saving taxpayers' money would have bigger fish to fry. And forget about the billions of dollars of tax revenue that is evaded or avoided by the corporate sector, which I suspect largely funds the Taxpayers' Union.
In late September, the union went through grants awarded by CNZ and tweeted the ones that it thought were a particular waste of money, or overly "woke". To judge art so arbitrarily makes me uneasy. I am reminded of the way Stalin criticised musical geniuses like Prokofiev and Shostakovich as "formalist" and "counter- revolutionary"; how Mao ruined the lives of great artists because of his and his wife's jealously; how the Nazis publicly humiliated "Bolshevik" and Jewish artists in an exhibition of "degenerate art".
Most people involved in the arts either rage at the list of successful CNZ recipients or sagely decide that good decisions have been made this time around - depending on whether they are funded or not. But as someone who has been both successful and unsuccessful with funding applications over the years, I think a strength of the system is that decisions are largely made by peers, not CNZ management.
One group that came under particular criticism from the Taxpayers' Union was a show called The Glitter Garden. "The Government is fighting Covid-19 with . . . Drag queens for kids!" the union tweeted. The Glitter Garden received $18,000 from CNZ to develop online resources and music to go with the show - a drag musical for children - which recently played at Circa Theatre.
To put that in perspective, that's 0.00005 per cent of the recent bailout of the Transmission Gully public/private consortium. It's also 30 per cent of the bailout the Taxpayers' Union itself received as part of the Covid wage subsidy.
Although the Taxpayers' Union campaign backfired, and bookings for The Glitter Garden soared, the performers received considerable nasty, homophobic, online abuse. Then the deputy leader of the New Conservative Party condemned an 11-year-old kid getting a drag makeover behind the scenes of the show as "highly sexualised". Really?
Like pantomimes, which have always featured cross-dressing with no complaints, drag shows have nothing to do with sexualising children. But with such a furore, I realised I had to see The Glitter Garden.
What I saw was fantastic. The kids were engaged for the whole hour - no mean feat. The set, costumes and choreography were excellent and the music catchy. Holding it all together was a simple story of self-acceptance: you should be who you want to be, even if that requires great bravery.
Frontperson Hugo Grrrl (George Fowler) managed to alternatively captivate the children and make the adults guffaw with wicked doubles- entendres. An audience of over 200 kids yelling "Come out; come out" - from a house - was delightfully subversive. It was the type of show I suspect Taxpayers' Union co-founder David Farrar - who used to attract many people to the theatre with his excellent blog reviews - would have loved.
By my rough calculations, the per-seat subsidy that The Glitter Garden received was less than $5 - tiny compared to the large per-seat subsidies we can see for opera and ballet.
So was this show, as some conservatives claimed, grooming or indoctrination? I asked my 10-year-old neighbour. Would she say that she liked the way it challenged heteronormative assumptions and portrayed a more fluid gender continuum? "I really liked it when the snail sang really well and when all the beautiful flowers suddenly popped out," she replied. Beautiful.
I'm not convinced that targeting artists fortunate enough to get a small art grants is a great way to improve the taxpayer's bang for the buck. If the Taxpayers' Union has genuine concerns, talk to artists rather than demonising a few.
As the New Conservatives would probably say, we should love all God's creatures equally. Personally, I liked the way The Glitter Garden described it: You should love all your carrots whether they are straight or wobbly, and not worry too much if your garden hose is a bit kinky.
