LOCKDOWN MAY LINGER as Covid cluster grows
The outbreak of coronavirus discovered in South Auckland has become a cluster and the chances of Auckland leaving lockdown by midnight tonight appear to be narrowing.
The Government is bracing for further spread of the virus, after 13 more confirmed cases of the virus and one probable case were discovered in the community by yesterday.
The response has sharply escalated - each confirmed case of Covid-19 will now be swept away to a quarantine facility, separated from their family and the community. "Once you identify a cluster, it grows before it slows. We should expect that to be the case here," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said.
The outbreak of Covid-19, first discovered on Tuesday evening, is now confirmed to have spread to a school, Mt Albert Grammar, and through staff and their family members at two workplaces, Americold cool storage and FinanceNow in Mt Eden.
Auckland is home to all the confirmed cases of the virus in the community.
One of the initial cases is now known to have travelled to Rotorua and Taupo, dining out, taking a farm tour, and sailing trip - while testing is being encouraged, the risk of transmission is said to be low in these places.
Worryingly, one person confirmed to have Covid-19 had visited a rest home in Waikato.
The person developed symptoms the day after visiting and one person at the rest home has tested negative for the virus since.
Clusters of coronavirus - 10 or more connected cases - grew within rest homes and were responsible for killing the most people when New Zealand was last fighting the virus's spread.
The source of the virus is yet to be determined. The most likely scenario remains that it may have entered through a managed isolation or quarantine facility, though genome sequencing of the outbreak hasn't yet linked it to a facility.
Testing at the border has expanded. Staff at the Ports of Auckland will be tested for Covid- 19, to ensure it hasn't entered over the maritime border.
The queues outside testing centres which carried into yesterday have flooded laboratories with more than 10,000 swabs. On Wednesday, 6006 of these swabs were tested.
Experts that model the virus's spread had warned there could be a dozen cases of Covid-19 lying beneath the four discovered on Tuesday; a threshold that has already been crossed.
Director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said he would not dispute the assessment there could be between 25 and 100 cases in the community.
"The earliest time that one of them displayed symptoms was on 31 July. It does imply it could have been several weeks ago that the very first case was in the community. No evidence yet of any super-spreading event," he said.
The decision to lift lockdown, or alert level 2 for the rest of New Zealand, will come at 5.30pm today.
A crucial factor will be whether the virus has been found outside the cluster, a second chain of transmission that cannot be connected to the first.
