Gully no giftTransmission Gully, the new $1.25 billion motorway out of...
Gully no giftTransmission Gully, the new $1.25 billion motorway out of Wellington, will not be open by Christmas. Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency said the builder has run out of time to complete safety, quality assurance, and consent tasks for the road to open in time for the holidays. It’s the latest in a string of delays for the troubled project that has become somewhat of a nightmare for all parties involved. The four-lane motorway is being built through a public-private partnership with the Wellington Gateway Partnership, with CPB Contractors and HEB Construction subcontracted to carry out the design and construction. Waka Kotahi chairman Sir Brian Roche said the delay was extremely disappointing. The road was meant to open on September 27, which was itself a delay to account for the fallout from the Covid-19 lockdown in 2020.
Murder chargeA woman has appeared in court charged with the murder of a man who died from critical injuries after being dropped off at a South Auckland medical centre. Police charged the 23-year-old with the murder of Rangiwhero Toia Ngaronoa, from Gisborne. The 22-year-old died in Middlemore Hospital on November 21. The woman was granted interim name suppression at Manukau District Court. She was remanded in custody to January 26. Police are searching for the person who had dropped Ngaronoa off at the clinic.Treatment delayedA woman’s treatment for terminal bowel cancer was delayed for years due to “a number of oversights” from her GP, the Health and Disability Commissioner has found. For more than two years, the woman in her 30s — who had a complex medical history — had presented to her medical centre with symptoms including abdominal pain, bowel issues and significant weight loss. In a report released yesterday, the health watchdog found that the GP had failed to recognise the woman’s symptoms, which delayed her cancer diagnosis and treatment. Due to her young age the GP did not consider her a cancer risk and instead attributed her symptoms to onset inflammatory bowel disease. Deputy Health and Disability Commissioner Dr Vanessa Caldwell said it had amounted to poor overall care for the patient.
Tongan noble diesThe Tonga Government has announced that Lord Ma’afu died in Auckland City Hospital on Sunday. Ma’afu was the Interim Minister of Lands. He was also a former Deputy Prime Minister. The Government said he held office in four consecutive Governments, and had an exemplary 40-year career in service to the royal household, the public and military. Ma’afu’s wife, Princess Tāone, died in 2018. They had two children, Tevita ’Unga and Fangaake Veikune.
Bonus for driversThe Waikato Regional Council is giving a Christmas $200,000 bonus to its bus drivers to share. This amounts to about $1000 for a full-time worker. The council said it recognises the job they have done through Covid-19 lockdowns in the region. The bonus was among a number of recommendations made by the council’s regional connections committee, which last month heard from Living Wage Aotearoa and First Union, which represents bus drivers. Committee chair Angela Strange said: “They’re the public face of our services and have continued right through Covid-19 lockdowns and changing requirements over the last 18 months or more. In the Waikato we are struggling to get enough bus drivers for our services, an issue which is being experienced right across New Zealand.”
