SURF’S UP AT OMAHA
This holiday home located just north of Auckland City has proven to be more than a beach house, writes LOUISE RICHARDSON
The Covid-19 lockdown saw many New Zealanders reimagining their futures and, in many cases, committing to a slower pace of life in the new world. If leaving town, either permanently or for weekends and holidays, is now on the wish-list, this versatile property, just a 250m stroll from the surf beach at the northern end of Omaha could be very suitable indeed.
It’s much more than just a beach house, following major renovations a few years ago when the interior was significantly upgraded.
The solid timber floors are macrocarpa, from the Matakana Sawmill, and exposed timber beams add a touch of rustic character throughout as does the colour palette, which is based on the shades and textures of nature.
Owner Denise Nel says that the fragrance of the marcocarpa is intoxicating.
“I just love it, and the timber floors are especially good when you have children because it really doesn’t matter when they run back from the beach and bring sand in with them — you can’t see it.”
She says that her two children, who are in their early teens, have made great friends in the neighbourhood, where everybody is incredibly friendly.
“They’ve enjoyed that true Kiwi childhood here and it’s so easy to get to — we just pack the car on Friday night and come up, then leave early on Monday morning and we’re back in Auckland in time for work.”
In summer, Omaha buzzes with beachgoers from near and far and outdoors enthusiasts have their pick of activities. Bowls, golf and tennis are all close at hand, while popular water sports include kayaking, jet skiing, paddle boarding and windsurfing.
Denise and her husband Gary are building a new home in Auckland and she says that they’ll be incorporating many of the elements they’ve loved most at Dornie Place. “It’s not a huge home but it works really well, especially when we have a houseful, which is often the case in summer.”
Paul Elsden from Bayleys Omaha Beach who is marketing the property says that it’s a gem. “The previous owners did such a good job with the renovations that the Nels haven’t had to do anything at all.”
He says that the two double bedrooms, the single bedroom and the sleepout combine to provide ample accommodation. Then you have decks on three sides and some are covered, so you can be out in any weather.
“This property is a good entry point to the Omaha market and there is potential for extending it too.”
The Nels say that the thing they’ll miss most is their wonderful neighbours.
“We’ll also miss the cafe and the sports club and just the great sense of community they have here — it’s really very special.”
Sale: Auction June 24
Contact: Paul Elsden, Bayleys, 021 936 011; Jonelle Smith, 021 464 557
