Plan for studentsA plan is under way to have charter flights bring thousands of...
Plan for studentsA plan is under way to have charter flights bring thousands of Chinese international students back to New Zealand — but this can only go ahead if it gets a nod from the Government. A travel ban put in place in February to stop the spread of Covid-19 has prevented more than 11,000 Chinese students who had been due back for their studies from travelling here. John Chisholm, a businessman in the educational book industry, has been in talks with Air New Zealand with charter flights booked to bring students back by July in time for the start of the second semester at universities. Litigants identified Two men who sued Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern over what they claimed was an unlawful detention during the Covid-19 lockdown can now be named. Dermot Gregory Nottingham and Robert Earle McKinney challenged the Government’s decision to confine people to their homes with habeas corpus claims, a 900-year-old legal procedure challenging detention without justification.
Ultimately, their case was dismissed by the Court of Appeal at the start of this month. But the men have indicated they may apply for leave to take the case to the Supreme Court. Nottingham is no stranger to the justice system and was serving a period of home detention for breaching suppression orders in a prominent Auckland court case and criminal harassment against five people, including a former MP.
DoC opens hutsThe Department of Conservation will open up its facilities as the country moves into Covid-19 alert level 2. DoC said all of its facilities, including huts and campsites, would re-open for public use. Its director of heritage and visitors, Steve Taylor, said accommodation bookings were capped at 10 people, and warned there should not be any more than 10 people at any of its non-bookable huts.
Parking fines
Wellingtonians were slapped with more than 800 parking fines on the first day of paid parking since the Covid-19 lockdown. Some motorists received double tickets. Wellington City Council parking wardens issued a total of 863 infringements on Monday and 44 warnings.
Correction
A Weekend Herald story incorrectly stated that Covid-19 was confined to China at the time of January 31. Several countries had confirmed their first cases by then.
