TRUSTEE CLAIMS DISCRIMINATION AGAINST CHURCH
A leader of the church at the centre of Auckland's August coronavirus cluster and second lockdown says science does have a place in society but he wouldn't do things differently next time.
Speaking to Stuff yesterday, Kelly Vogel rejected claims the Mt Roskill Evangelical Fellowship was secretive and said Auckland should loosen restrictions and move to alert level 1.
The long-serving fellowship trustee said the church was widely misinterpreted and unfairly described, but that was the price to pay for following God's word in a society where many others didn't.
"We believe God is totally in control."
But Vogel said science had a place in society, and the fellowship's beliefs could be compatible with official guidance on Covid-19.
"There's a place for science, like there's a place for the will of God."
The Auckland August cluster linked to the suburban fellowship emerged last month and grew into the country's largest by far, reaching 176 cases on Saturday.
Health Minister Chris Hipkins last week said some close contacts of the church sub-cluster weren't previously disclosed, including a student who recently tested positive.
The church was investigated late last month after allegations of prayer meetings being held during level 3 restrictions.
"Well, I'm not quite sure we would have done [things] differently," Vogel said. "We don't really know too much about science. We don't really know too much about politics."
Vogel, the first church leader to speak at length publicly, said the church was obviously discriminated against, and had been the target of unfair commentary.
Of the Auckland cluster, 62 per cent of confirmed cases yesterday were Pasifika people, and 22 per cent Maori.
A former church member last week told Stuff fellowship members did not associate much with outsiders.
Vogel rejected claims the fellowship was secretive. "It depends what you mean [by] 'secretive'. We've never been secretive when it comes to the gospel."
The church leader was asked what he said to people who blamed the fellowship for the cluster and the second lockdown.
"That's entirely up to them, but it's probably because they've been misinformed."
The Ministry of Health yesterday said 98 per cent of the congregation had now been tested, as had 98 per cent of people who attended a bereavement event linked to the cluster's spread.
Vogel understood some of the remaining two per cent were awaiting results.
"They're elderly people, and they're sick people. Some of them are not 100 per cent. They're quite advanced in years."
Health officials yesterday confirmed Mt Roskill Evangelical Fellowship had actively encouraged all members of the congregation to get retested for Covid-19 and comply with other public health advice.
Vogel said the fellowship would continue to abide by Ministry of Health directions.
"The Government's job is to lead the country, to protect its citizens. We try to do our task and let Government do their task. God has appointed them. The Bible has made it very clear we're to be submissive to them."
But Vogel said that did not mean the fellowship would always agree with Government, especially if official instructions went against what he believed was God's word.
"We put our trust in God," Vogel said. "Our responsibility is to preach and teach the gospel."
Vogel said remote religious service meetings compliant with bans on large gatherings were probably not sustainable.
"There's many forms of teaching and preaching but for us, we believe fellowship with people is absolutely essential."
The Government is expected to decide today whether to move alert levels.
