Online classes start
Million Kiwi kids begin lessons from home thanks to free devices, internet
Amillion Kiwi kids start a new term today locked out of their schools and early childhood centres because of the coronavirus lockdown.
Most are expected to learn online thanks to a huge roll-out of free computers and internet links which one low-decile school principal calls a long-term “game-changer”.
Two educational television channels will kick off at 9am, one on TVNZ2+1 and one on Māori TV’s Te Reo channel, and thousands of families without internet or with younger children will get packs of learning materials couriered to their homes.
Māori TV’s service will run for 10 weeks - a sign that normal schooling is unlikely to resume in a hurry after the current lockdown ends.
The launch of the English-language channel marks the return of the children’s presenter Suzy Cato, who greeted Kiwi pupils on television 20 years ago. She is fronting science, maths and other content.
The arrival of the TV lessons has prompted some low-decile principals to worry that kids will still miss out because schools have lost contact with them.
Decile 1 Tangaroa College principal Davida Suasua has given the Ministry of Education a list of 300 students who still need computers, out of her roll of just over 800, after already distributing the school’s existing 75 devices and buying 18 more for health science students before the ministry offer was unveiled.
But she said many other families have not responded to messages.
“They change their numbers as much as they change their T-shirts, so having a contact number that is contactable, that in itself is another concern,” she said.
“We normally go round and visit, but we can’t do that. We don’t know how many of our students have been moved out of housing, we had a few that were in emergency housing.
“We don’t know what this is going to look like, how many students will return — a lot of families have lost their jobs and our students might be told to get out and find a job rather than come back to school.”
Ministry chief digital officer Stuart Wakefield said it aims to provide devices and home internet in the next four weeks to all 20,000 students in Years 11 to 13 who don’t have them, and believes up to 145,000 students in 82,000 households will need them across all age groups.
Devices and internet are being delivered first to students sitting national exams this year in their last three years of school, starting with schools in the lowest income deciles.
Harry Savage, a 5-year-old Year 1 student at Tauranga’s decile 9 Bethlehem College, is ready to start learning on an iPad bought for the purpose.
“We had been reluctant to have an iPad in the house, as Harry just loves grabbing tablets from his older cousins or Poppa to play games,” said dad Jared Savage.
“But with the schools shut, and we don’t know how long for, I ended up ordering one online ... simply to maintain contact with his teacher and the online lessons.”
Wayne Buckland, principal of decile 5 Bream Bay College near Whangārei, said he bought 100 Chromebooks just before the lockdown for families that didn’t have suitable devices in his roll of 580.
“We configured them between 3pm and 4pm on the Wednesday of the lockdown and passed them out through the windows of cars between 4pm and 5pm,” he said.
“We did fully online teaching on the Thursday and Friday after the lockdown [before school holidays] and we had 83 per cent and 87 per cent attendance, and we’d be expecting attendance in the high 90s when we start.”
Greg Pierce, principal of decile 2 Aorere College in Papatoetoe, has asked the ministry for devices for 500 of his 850 students in Years 11 to 13.
“We still think there are probably 10 to 15 per cent who have no connectivity. So we have given all of that information to the ministry ... The vast majority [should be linked up] within the next two weeks.
“The expectation is that when the school comes back the devices will come back with the students.
“For schools like us, it could be game-changing.”
But he said face-to-face relationships between teachers and students were also crucial. Many students were not well placed to learn at home. “I’d say more than 50 per cent would live in overcrowded conditions.”
Robin Staples of decile 1 Southern Cross Campus in Māngere has asked for devices for about half of his students, but said unstable homes would complicate internet links.
