TRUTH FIRST CASUALTY OF NEW WAVE
News of the second wave of Covid-19 has been a disorienting blow to the team of five million. Who doesn't dread a return to the twilight world of the level 4 lockdown, with its baking recipes, its daytime TV and its one permissible walk around the block? We did it once; please don't make us go back.
It is clear that national complacency, born from our belief in good luck and collective sacrifice, has contributed to our undoing. It was alarming to learn that in early August, only one week before the second wave, nearly two-thirds of all border and hotel isolation workers in Auckland had never been tested for Covid-19.
Was the threat of infection being taken as seriously as it should have been? The Ministry of Health's own advice said that border workers should be tested weekly, and epidemiologists such as Dr Michael Baker and Dr David Skegg have expressed shock or surprise over inadequate levels of testing.
While not all border staff have close contacts with people in isolation, and tests were available, they were not compulsory. Thankfully that has changed and all staff will be tested. As Health Minister Chris Hipkins says, enforcing a mandatory medical procedure is "a pretty heavy trigger to pull".
It is likely but not confirmed that the second wave somehow slipped through the border, rather than lingering undetected in the community, but Deputy Prime Minister Winston Peters has already made the bald claim that the new outbreak came from a breach inside New Zealand's quarantine system.
Sounding more like an online conspiracy-monger than a senior Government minister, Peters told Australia's ABC that: "You don't always find out from the experts. It's something you find out by contact with other people."
The impression of lax border testing obviously helps rumours and conspiracies to flourish, but so does the image of a government forcing tests on people who may not want them. That feeds into the growing networks of those who believe that Covid-19 is a hoax and that the pandemic is really a front for governments to expand control of populations and erode human rights.
Such thinking has grown increasingly mainstream. A National Party official in Taranaki has attacked alert level restrictions as breaches of "the basic human rights and civil liberties of everyday Kiwis". The deputy leader of the same party, Gerry Brownlee, has clarified comments he made earlier this week that had a conspiratorial feeling. Brownlee implied on Wednesday that the prime minister's trip to a mask factory, growing talk about mask-wearing and the director-general of health's Covid-19 test were "an interesting series of facts" viewed together, in light of the second wave.
The explanation came two days later when Brownlee said: "It's not my intention at a time like this to create any degree of uncertainty beyond the natural uncertainty that comes when you're dealing with something as unpredictable as this virus."
It took a fair bit of media and public pressure for Brownlee to clarify his airy musings about interesting facts. It shows that vigilance and exposure are the best responses to conspiracy theories and fake news, rather than ignoring them and hoping they simply go away. But when even the New Zealand Defence Force feels compelled to go online to clear up inaccuracies on social media, it's clear that misinformation is thriving in New Zealand like never before.
