Code words to help abused
Family harm cases up 20% first Sunday of Covid lockdown
Domestic violence agencies are working on partnering with supermarkets and other essential services so abuse victims can use code words or access free wifi to seek help during the Covid-19 crisis.
Other solutions may include adding agencies’ information to receipts when specific items are purchased — to reach those not already in touch with support services, Justice under-secretary Jan Logie told the Herald.
It comes as both reported abuse — and those seeking help because they fear they might commit abuse — escalates across New Zealand, a trend also seen in other countries in coronavirus lockdown.
On Good Friday, police released statistics about domestic violence — which it calls “family harm” — showing a 20per cent spike in cases on the first Sunday after the lockdown, compared to the previous month.
Logie said that help services for men at risk of committing violence had also received an increased number of calls since lockdown began.
Experts say the nature of pandemics provide an environment that is known to exacerbate violence against women and children. Being at home with an abuser makes victims more vulnerable, because there is no escape.
Also, events that cause financial insecurity and stress, particularly when coupled with uncertainty, have been shown to lead to an increase in aggression at home. Studies previously found such spikes during the global financial crisis in 2008, and when natural disasters — such as the Christchurch earthquake — hit.
Logie, who has responsibility for domestic and sexual violence issues, said they knew from overseas that the “rules changed” in a lockdown context.
“You will see excuses made for violence like ‘oh they were under stress’, or that victims will think their safety isn’t as important because of the difficulties with Covid-19.
“The message is that the safety of every New Zealander matters to us and that includes people experiencing harm from family or sexual violence.”
The sector had been working hard behind the scenes to adapt to the Covid-19 environment, with $12 million of government funding available for things such as extra motel beds for refuge clients, clothing and food, one-on-one support, and online services, she said.
One area currently in progress was connecting the victim agencies with essential services — so that victims with limited opportunities for disclosure had another avenue rather than using the phone, which could be difficult if they were living with an abuser.
This includes the possibility of using code words at the supermarket or pharmacy, receipts with agency information attached that were linked to certain products, or free wifi at some sites.
Women’s Refuge were also considering adding a live webchat function to their shielded site — which women can use to get information or report abuse, but appears as though they are looking at The Warehouse, or Countdown, or the Ministry of Social Development website.
A chat would enable women to speak with an advocate in real time.
Logie said the changes weren’t just about supporting victims during alert level 4.
“We know this isn’t going to be a short-lived concern, but that the impacts of people being out of work and spending more time in the homemeans that there is an increased risk from those using violence,” she said. “There will be increased demand on services as we come out of this time and it may be sustained for quite a while.”
