YOUNG SCHOLAR FEELS US PULL
A student who flew home just before New Zealand went into lockdown has decided to head back to the United States, where there are now more than 5 million coronavirus cases.
Nina Paripovich is aware of the risks but the 20-year-old Hamilton woman has booked her tickets to return to Dartmouth College in New Hampshire next month.
"Our college has a thorough pandemic plan . . . I will be expected to go into self-isolation for two weeks as soon as I get back," she said.
There were more than 1 million international students enrolled in US colleges last year, which made up 5.5 per cent of the total US student body. Most were from China, which accounted for 369,548 students.
Data tracking the number of Kiwis studying in the US was difficult to obtain, but an article published by the US embassy in New Zealand said more than 1500 were pursuing higher education degrees in the US in 2015.
Paripovich is a former student of St Peter's, Cambridge. She received a scholarship for Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, in 2018.
"Hanover is a smaller town of about 10,000 people and there are no [Covid] cases there. And it's just about maintaining that, and making sure the two-week isolation period is done correctly by all the students returning."
Paripovich, a former New Zealand junior tennis representative, had just finished the second term of her second year at the college, studying computer science, when Covid-19 started its march on the US.
"Things started to get worse in New York and Boston and then colleges started sending students home. They gave us five days to leave campus and at that point the athletic department reached out to me to help book flights home," she said.
"I came home [to Hamilton] and had to self-isolate. I got a test because I wasn't feeling well but it turned out I had tonsillitis. I also had a police check- up not long after I got home, to make sure I was self-isolating. I think the next day we went into level 4."
Initially, the college thought students would be able to return after five weeks. "But two weeks into the new spring term, the college announced that the full 10-week term would be going online."
Paripovich had enjoyed the unexpected stay with her parents. But distance studying had been difficult, prompting her decision to return to the US. Another factor was the chance to secure a software engineering internship for her third year of study.
She hoped that in the long term, New Zealand students could return to pursuing study overseas. "Colleges need international students to provide different culture and perspectives on the world, and I really hope Covid doesn't put an end to that."
