PETER SALMON AND MORGANA O'REILLY
Morgana O'Reilly, 34, and Peter Salmon, 44, are an actor and director living in Auckland with their kids Luna, 4 and Ziggy, 22 months. The couple's first project together, a TV series called INSiDE, is about a second, more deadly wave of Covid-19. The show was created during lockdown.
--------------------
The first time I saw her, we were at a sort of mutual friend's 30th birthday party. I saw her out on the street and the mutual friends introduced us. I recognised her from a show called A Thousand Apologies. I thought she was the best thing in it.
I was drawn to her, definitely. But I'd just broken up with a long-term relationship, and I was pretty cautious about getting too close to anyone again. That's probably why I took a wee while to come round.
The project came about from NZ On Air offering this rapid response grant. Morgana and I had been constantly looking for a thing to do together, so we sort of wrote it around her.
It was a tricky thing because although we could have done it in Level 4, it wouldn't have been very good. It would have been me shooting on my iPhone, and we would probably have had to shoot once the children went to bed - [which would have made us] terrible parents and terrible film-makers I imagine. It was Level 2 by the time we started shooting.
It's cheesy to say that she lights up the screen, but she has a million wonderful facial expressions that are just illuminating, really. You don't know what you're going to get and they're kind of random and really special. Morgana did a solo show called The Height of the Eiffel Tower, which she toured around people's bedrooms and living rooms. I remember her performing the whole thing to me, it's like an hour-long show, to rehearse. I think I fell in love with her then. She's just so good.
We did work together on a show called Nothing Trivial, where she was a guest role and I was directing. We'd only just started going out. We realised that it was maybe a bit nepotistic, so we sort of kept it on the down-low. She had to have this sex scene with Shane Cortese. And it was awkward. Mainly for Shane.
Morgana is quite the opposite of Rose, her character [in INSiDE]. She's pretty outgoing and vivacious. Rose is quite in her shell and scared. We have a great shorthand, because we know each other so well. It was a really quick and efficient way of shooting. And we can be quite honest with each other. We never argued on set, really.
We got married in 2012 at a registry office. And then a year later, we got married again with all our friends and stuff. We had a fake Pope who married us. We got a friend to dress up. It was wonderful. We actually just keep on talking about getting married again because we had such a good time.
We met in New York City. I was staying on a friend's couch and it was their 30th birthday surprise party and Pete showed up towards the end of the night. I think the first thing he said to me was, "Let's make a movie!" We started hanging out. And then I got a real big crush on him.
I couldn't understand what was going on because we were having such a nice time together. I'd always sort of position myself in the subways or whatever, so that he could lean in and give me a kiss and it would it be fine, it wouldn't be awkward, it'd be totally fine, it'd be natural. Then I was like, "Maybe I'm getting this all wrong! Maybe we're just friends?!" Then one night we went to a friend's dinner party and he put his hand on my leg under the table. I was like, "WHAT'S GOING ON?!"
In the end, I just got really drunk and told him I had a crush on him and that seemed to do the trick.
A couple of weeks later, he went back to New Zealand.
When I got home [not too much later] he was there. That was in 2009. And we've been together ever since.
I got cast as the lead character [in INSiDE] because there were no other actors around for me to audition against, so that was pretty sweet. Our lockdown was this really weird situation of Pete in one room on Zoom with the writers, me in the other room playing with children by myself losing my mind, and getting the updates in the evenings, now and then adding my five cents.
[During Level 2] we were having to wake up at like, 5.30 in the morning, because we filmed it in our house. It was this mad dash to get the kids ready, drop them off either to my parents or our friends, come back and film all day, and then the kids would come home.
Pete is a total weirdo. He presents as very normal but really, he is very strange and kooky and funny and feels very greatly for the world. He has incredible integrity with his art and with his life. He's a staunch vegetarian.
He's got a really wacky sense of humour which, when you first meet him, you might not quite get because he's quiet until you get to know him.
He's got this alter ego, which he had for a while, on Facebook called Pedro Fins. He had quite the following there for a little bit. He would illustrate people's Facebook status updates with these wacky cartoons. It's kind of his weird little id, I reckon.
I think he would admit, that a banana is his spirit animal. It's a weird fruit. With a nice colour. Their iconology is festive. But they're absurd.
