LONG SHADOW OF COVID HANGS OVER CANCER
A cancer expert says the sector is in crisis and hundreds of deaths are imminent as a result of Covid-19 lockdown measures.
Retired oncologist Professor David Lamb says the number of patients undiagnosed is likely to increase until more resources are pumped into an already overstretched sector.
Te Aho o te Kahu (Cancer Control Agency) releases monthly updates on the number of cancer registrations over the past six months.
In April and May, while the country was in lockdown, registrations fell behind the numbers for the same period in 2019. This suggested 1556 registrations were missed due to services being closed during the lockdown.
In June, however, there were 225 more registrations compared to June 2019. This suggests there are still 1331 people who have cancer and do not know because they have not been tested.
The agency's analysis focuses on a longer six-month period, which suggests only 689 fewer cancer registrations compared to the same period in 2019.
District Health Boards across New Zealand have been scrambling to catch up and test more patients.
Lamb, who worked in the cancer sector for more than 40 years and currently holds an academic position at Victoria University has previously labelled the Ministry of Health's handling of cancer diagnostics during lockdown a "disgrace" and predicted hundreds of unnecessary deaths as a result.
Cancer services were already at breaking point before the pandemic hit which is why a catch up is impossible, Lamb says.
On the latest figures, registrations for Maori remain down five percent, Pacific people down 2.5 percent and European down 5.3 percent. There was an increase in registrations for the Asian ethnic group.
There has been an 18 percent increase in surgeries for Maori compared to the same period last year, as well as a 15 percent increase in prostate cancer surgeries compared to 2019. But surgeries overall were down 2 per cent during lockdown, driven largely by the decrease in diagnostic services.
Lamb says the latest figures show the catchup on missed diagnostics is failing,
and will culminate in hundreds of avoidable deaths. More manpower is needed to push through testing, he says.
"The risks associated with shutdown of diagnostic cancer services were predictably greater than the risks of labelling the services 'essential', and this should have been recognised before the start of lockdown," Lamb says.
The six-month window to catch up on cases could result in the deaths of up to 400 people, according to UK models which show that cases had to be caught within three months to be effective.
Professor Diana Sarfati, chief executive of Te Aho o Te Kahu says the latest report showed there was a substantial increase in new cancer registrations in June compared to this time last year.
"While a cancer diagnosis is never good news, this increase in diagnoses does mean we are catching up on the delayed diagnoses of lockdown, and 225 people can now begin treatment," Sarfati says.
"With these new diagnoses there is extra pressure on chemotherapy and radiation services, which are already stretched in some parts of the country. The agency will work with the Ministry of Health and DHBs to ensure people can get the treatment they need, when they need it."
Lamb says a more direct approach by Te Aho o te Kahu and the Ministry of Health is needed so the public understands the severity of the issue.
"The implication of the delayed diagnoses in terms of cancer survival has never been addressed by the Cancer Control Agency, in contrast to the National Health Service in Britain which has fronted up to the public and said the missed diagnoses could result in thousands of additional cancer deaths," he said.
"It's important that the public know this, so people with worrying symptoms are fully motivated to pressure their GPs to get a specialist appointment without delay, otherwise requests made by GPs to DHB specialists will just join the bottom of waitlists.
But Sarfati says it's still too soon to say how cancer detection and treatment has been affected by Covid-19.
"We know that New Zealand is doing extremely well compared to other countries around the world, as the disruption to our health services was so short. Unlike countries severely impacted by Covid-19, cancer treatment in New Zealand has continued largely unaffected."
Breast Cancer Foundation chief executive Evangelia Henderson agrees the sector is in crisis.
Based on agency reporting, Henderson believes 400 women were affected by Covid-19 delays and, in some cases, the complete shutdown of screening.
"Where I think we need to go faster and harder with the ministry is about saying, yes, we've got to clear the backlog, you've got to provide more funding to be able to take on extra staff over weekends," she says.
"But also we call on the Government not to forget that Covid doesn't stop breast cancer or any cancer and that those plans that they had in place need to continue."
"Covid has been awful and it has killed people. ... But this year alone, we are expecting 650 women to die of breast cancer. So I think that puts it in perspective.".
Cancer Society medical director and oncologist Dr Chris Jackson who had earlier warned that missed diagnoses had to be captured in the first three months following the lockdown or deaths were likely, says cancer services have looked after all people during this time.
"Cancer services around NZ have been flat out trying to catch up with the impact of lockdown, and we have certainly also seen a major spike in demand for Cancer Society services, which our staff and volunteers have given their all to meet," Jackson says.
The Ministry of Health said it is working with DHBs and the sector to establish revised policy and delivery plans, reflecting an increase in ongoing Planned Care funding of $31.35m a year and a one-off boost of $282.5m over the next three years
