Sex workers in Sth Is scare appear in Blenheim court
Two sex workers who sparked a Covid-19 scare in the South Island have 24 hours to return to Auckland while a man who travelled from Auckland to Wānaka was last night charged with breaching lockdown restrictions as police crack down on illegal movements.
A police spokesperson confirmed a 36-year-old man travelled to Wellington on October 8 before heading to Wanaka on October 12. “He has been charged with failing to comply with a Covid-19 order,” a spokesperson said. The man will appear in the Queenstown District Court on October 18. Otago Lakes Central Police said they “will not hesitate to take enforcement action against those who are deliberately breaching lockdown restrictions”.
This follows on from another Wānaka escape incident where William Willis and lawyer Hannah Rawnsley were charged with failing to comply with a Covid-19 health order.
In Blenheim, Yongxiu Su, 49, from Henderson, and Dongyun Yang, 48, a laundry worker from East Tamaki Heights in Auckland, appeared in the Blenheim District Court yesterday.
The pair appeared via video link from Blenheim police station, facing charges of failing to comply with an order made under section 11 of the Covid 19 Public Health Response Act 2020. They were bailed with no plea back to Auckland and ordered to reappear in court this month.
Hours earlier, they tested negative for the Delta variant of Covid-19.
Appearing separately before Judge Tony Zohrab, the pair spoke only to confirm their names, although one added she had been in New Zealand for 11 years and her English was not very good.
Both women have until 5pm today to check in with their local Auckland police stations, before being bailed to their home addresses.
Judge Zohrab said it was not in the public interest to grant suppression. “This is a public court and the public deserve to know,” he said.
They are next due in the Blenheim court October 24. They face a maximum penalty of six months in prison and a $4000 fine if convicted.
It is understood the pair left Auckland on October 9 and were arrested at a Blenheim motel on Wednesday after allegedly travelling from Auckland without any exemption.
It’s alleged that the women failed to produce a negative Covid-19 test before departing Auckland. It’s understood neither had had a test for Covid-19.
A source said the women did not resist their arrest but have since refused to provide any details about their movements since leaving Auckland and who they have had contact with.
“Police and the Ministry of Health continue to investigate the women’s movements, including when and how they have managed to travel to Blenheim.”
All staff interacting with the women wore full protective equipment (PPE), police said. “The six officers who dealt with this woman were initially stood down as a precautionary measure, however following advice from health officials, police have subsequently been advised the staff are not required to isolate.”
