FREEDOM FOR THE LUCKY COMES AT COST TO THE REST
Singapore's approach to Covid-19 is lauded around the world, but it's been achieved at the expense of a big chunk of its population, and we shouldn't go thinking we are all that different.
There are endless calls for our Covid-19 response to be smarter, like Singapore's, not so reliant on continuing lockdowns, more focused on testing, contact tracing, vaccination, with some mask- wearing and social distancing thrown in. After five weeks of lockdown, a lot of Auckland probably feels this way too.
However, there is one part of Singapore's strategy that is often not talked about. While many have enjoyed freedom, nearly one-sixth of the population has not. Hundreds of thousands of migrant workers have been locked down in their dormitories, allowed out only to work on building sites or in essential services.
For them, freedom is more like being trapped in a cage. Migrants are reportedly packed 20 people to a room, and aren't even allowed to go to the supermarket without prior permission. All this, while almost everyone else walks around freely. Their freedoms and lifestyle rely on the migrants being able to go to work, which is why they are still being ferried to and from their essential workplaces.
To this day, the Singaporean government maintains different case counts, one for people in migrant worker dormitories, the other for "community" cases.
Yet to single out Singapore for having taken this approach is unfair. Wherever lockdowns have been employed, we've seen something similar emerge the world over - it's just a manner of degree, and unfortunately New Zealand is no exception. The pandemic and its lockdown restrictions have turned into something akin to a lot of white-collar work- from-homers hiding out in their bedrooms while the "essential" class keeps them well-fed.
Turns out a lot of people are not all that worse off under these lockdowns. They're a massive inconvenience, but the average voter doesn't blame the Government for them. Even the economic cost is small for significant chunks of the economy. Some parts of the economy even profit from it, as the dozens of container ships anchored off the port of Long Beach attest, or even those off Waitemata Harbour.
The lack of visible political or economic costs has made us less willing to listen to those bearing them. All of this has played a part in the long tail of the lockdown we are now in. It is likely no accident that "mystery" cases are popping up in areas of Auckland traditionally ignored, like Mangere, Otara, Papatoetoe and Manurewa, where people make do on low wages, in overcrowded conditions, and mattresses on floors or in garages. As in Singapore, which saw cases in its migrant worker dormitories explode to over 1000 a day, this situation was a disaster waiting to happen, and still is.
These areas have been ignored for a long time, even when their leaders have cried out in the aftermath of the pandemic first arriving on our shores. Since that first lockdown, we have heard calls for better pay and conditions for essential workers, vaccines for the most vulnerable, more widespread testing, and less intrusive forms of testing like saliva to help us keep on top of any outbreaks.
At one stage, some community advocates proposed an amnesty for illegal migrants, around fears that some might never present themselves to be tested. Many of these protests and entreaties have fallen on deaf ears, perhaps with the exception of a recently ramped-up vaccination drive. Even here, the authorities have something to answer for. We can point the finger at vaccine hesitancy, but many of the most vulnerable haven't even been able to access the vaccine until relatively recently.
Their demographics are skewed younger, meaning they're automatically lower down the priority list. They are also more likely to have undiagnosed conditions (those in the poorest neighbourhoods are less likely to see a doctor), which could cause terrible conditions if they catch Covid-19. The upshot of all this is a lot of people ended up at the back of queue for vaccines when they really should have been at the front.
Like Singapore, people from these communities are employed in occupations to which people barely pay attention during normal times, but are essential during a pandemic.
It's time we realised some of our most ignored communities are having an even tougher time during this pandemic than everybody else.
They are not just essential to supplies being delivered, but to the success of our elimination strategy too. If we are content to keep them cooped up, without listening to them, then we are following the part of Singapore's example that we really shouldn't be.
