AUCKLAND LOCKDOWN f louters 'deeply sorry'
A couple who breached lockdown rules to fly from Hamilton to Wanaka have apologised for their "irresponsible and inexcusable" actions as their names are revealed.
William John Lawrence Willis, 35, and Hannah Rawnsley, 26, a lawyer, are set to be charged with breaching the Covid-19 Public Health Response Act over police claims they crossed the Auckland border unlawfully, using essential worker exemptions, on Thursday.
They then drove to Hamilton Airport, where they took a commercial flight to Queenstown, via Wellington, rented a vehicle and drove to a holiday home in Wanaka.
The pair had sought name suppression in a bid to keep their identity secret, but an interim order preventing them from being named lapsed at 7pm last night.
In a statement released last night, the pair said their decision to travel to Wanaka last week was "completely irresponsible and inexcusable".
"We are deeply sorry for our actions and would like to unreservedly apologise to the Wanaka community, and to all the people of Aotearoa New Zealand, for what we did."
They said they both received negative Covid-19 tests prior to travelling and on their return to Auckland. In addition, they were not considered close contacts and had not visited any locations of interest.
Explaining their bid to get name suppression, they said they sought it after receiving death threats, and they had a "genuine fear for our safety".
The pair said they were committed to taking responsibility for their actions and would not be seeking further name suppression.
Willis' mother, Judge Mary- Beth Sharp, said: "Like the rest of New Zealand, I was appalled to learn of my son William and his partner's actions over the weekend.
"In addition, I was and am highly embarrassed.
"Had I known of their intentions, which of course I did not, I would have told them not to act so thoughtlessly and selfishly."
She supported the decision to no longer seek name suppression. Willis is the director of Karaka- based Matawhio Sports Horses Ltd, which breeds and produces showjumping horses for the New Zealand and overseas markets.
Its website and social media pages have been removed since the couple's lockdown breach was made public.
Rawnsley is a family court and criminal lawyer who works for barrister Roddie Sim in Pukekohe. Sim's website was taken down yesterday amid a backlash on social media.
Under Covid restrictions, lawyers are classed as providing essential services in certain situations.
New Zealand Law Society president Tiana Epati told Stuff all registered lawyers were sent a letter at the start of the first 2020 lockdown that said travel was allowed but only for "priority court proceedings".
"If any lawyer was proved to have misused this letter, that would be a disciplinary matter.
"There is no other acceptable use of this letter," she said.
A spokeswoman from the office of Chief District Court Judge Heemi Taumaunu confirmed a Wellington judge would hear the couple's case to avoid any perceived conflict of interest.
"The chief District Court judge was advised by Judge Mary-Beth Sharp . . . that her son is one of the persons who is the subject of possible charges and that she was not involved in any way in relation to the actions of her son and his partner."
