HERE COMES COUNTRY'S BIGGEST GDP DROP EVER
Data to be released on Thursday will show New Zealand's economy has experienced its sharpest, deepest contraction on record.
Gross domestic product data for the June 2020 quarter will be released on Thursday, showing the impact of the March and April Covid-19 lockdown.
New Zealand is one of the last countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to report its second-quarter GDP data.
The United Kingdom has already posted a year-on-year drop of 21.7 per cent. France has fallen almost 14 per cent, Italy just over 12 per cent and Canada 12 per cent. The United States dropped 9.5 per cent.
ASB chief economist Nick Tuffley said the data could only serve as a rough approximation of the impact because it was hard to measure the extent of the fall in activity, "particularly under the difficult conditions Stats NZ and many businesses are operating in".
He said ASB expected to see a drop of 11 per cent for the quarter. That's revised from the 17 per cent drop ASB expected when the lockdown first took effect. Tuffley said with government support continuing and some sectors not being as badly hit as was expected, the impact was less.
"Some activity has rebounded to pre- lockdown level quickly. Retail has been a bit like a cork pushed under water."
Still, he said it would be the biggest quarterly drop on record and one of the worst annual results since the Great Depression.
Christina Leung, a principal economist at NZIER, said she expected a drop in activity of 10.5 per cent in the quarter. "Given all the measurement issues, which Stats NZ have tried their best to work their way around given the difficult circumstances, this GDP release will be more an estimation than actual record of activity over the quarter."
Infometrics expects a 13.5 per cent drop year on year and a 12.8 per cent drop in the quarter.
Kiwibank economists said they expected a 12.5 per cent fall for the quarter and annual growth to be down by about 13 per cent. "Our forecast is less severe than the 18 per cent contraction we had previously pencilled in.
"The nationwide lockdown at the start of the quarter put the brakes on the economy as we hunkered down to fight Covid-19. The economy came out of lockdown sooner and with more sustained vigour than was expected.
"The unprecedented nature of the fall in [second-quarter] GDP means there is a significant margin of error around any forecast. And there is likely to be large revisions made to the numbers in the quarters ahead."
They said the data would show no industry had been left untouched by the lockdown.
"Industries reliant on foreign visitors such as tourism and education will be the hardest hit. Arts and recreation activity may fall by almost a third and retail trade is expected to make the largest contribution to the fall in GDP.
"Manufacturing is also likely to be a major contributor to the fall . . . Primary production is expected to post a moderate fall, with forestry bearing the brunt of the global Covid disruption."
Although the numbers will probably show the bottom of the Covid-19 hit, the data was already a bit historical, Tuffley said. GDP will be "much, much higher" in the September quarter.
"What lies ahead is of much more importance than what happened last quarter. We are almost at the end of the third quarter. A decent rebound in activity is expected in [the third quarter] and we are picking a 10 per cent quarter-on-quarter jump."
