NCEA concerns hit schools
Covid causing worry; credits changes mooted
Reduced credit requirements for high-school qualifications are being mooted to make up for the closure of schools in the coronavirus lockdown.
South Auckland’s Aorere College principal Greg Pierce says the assessments required for the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) should be reduced in proportion to the school time that has been lost due to the lockdown.
Auckland Secondary School Principals president Richard Dykes said schools need early decisions on NCEA requirements, and on any possible extension of the school year to make up for time lost in the lockdown, so that they can plan for the rest of the year.
Kaipara College principal Steve McCracken has also written an open letter to Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, proposing that NCEA level 1 should be abandoned for this year and that the requirements for levels 2 and 3 should be reduced by 20 credits.
However, the proposals are not supported by either of the two main secondary principals’ groups.
Pierce, who chairs the Aim Hi group of nine low-decile South Auckland high schools, said students in low-decile schools learned through relationships with teachers and many lacked the quiet spaces, computers and Wi-Fi required to learn effectively at home.
“Every day that students from low-decile schools are not at school, they are disadvantaged by that,” he said.
“Students at our sort of school rely more heavily on the guidance counsellors and the social worker network and the nurses that are all working in tandem with the teachers.”
He said the fairest way to give all a chance would be to reduce the credits required at each level of NCEA in proportion to the number of weeks of the school year that schools are closed.
McCracken, whose decile 7 school includes students from affluent and low-income families, said his call to suspend level 1 and reduce the credits required at the other two levels came out of talking to senior students.
“There is a severe increase in stress and anxiety around NCEA and what that is going to mean for them, post-secondary school,” he said.
However Secondary Principals’ Association national president Deidre Shea and Secondary Principals’ Council chairman James Morris argued that there was flexibility in the NCEA system for schools to cope. The NZ Qualifications Authority (NZQA) has provided guidance on which units can be assessed online and which should be held to assess when schools reopen.
Papatoetoe High School principal Vaughan Couillault said reducing the credits required would risk international recognition of NCEA.
Grant McMillan of James Cook High School, part of Pierce’s Aim Hi group, said the Government was moving towards reducing the credits required at level 1 from 80 to 60 in the next few years, but that should not be rushed.
“I think we should work out what we want the future of NCEA to look like and then change to something, not do two things at the same time at the risk of doing something badly.”
He expects that NZQA will take account of the lockdown in its assessments, as it did in Canterbury after the quakes.
“As I understand it, they ended up scaling results in Canterbury.”
NZQA has been asked for comment.
