How lockdown will hit retail spending
Economists predict sharp drop in spending this week
Auckland’s sudden move to Covid-19 alert level 3 is expected to have a ripple negative effect on retail spending across the country — but the question is: For how long?
Economists are predicting a sharp drop in spending this week, in categories outside of consumables, as consumers tighten purse strings amid uncertainty of a potential widespread community outbreak of the virus.
Retail spending fell 0.4 per cent in January, though it was up 1.9 per cent on the same time last year, according to the latest figures from Stats NZ.
Core spending excluding vehicles and fuel, however, fell 0.7 per cent in January, and that followed declines in November and December, down 0.6 per cent and 0.9 per cent.
Data last week shows spending in the retail industries fell by $24 million in January compared with December.
Economists forecast spending will fall more this month in response to the upgrade in Covid restrictions and are cautious on uncertainty ahead.
ASB senior economist Jane Turner said there was no doubt spending would stall this week.
“We are going to see a bit of a fall in February, how big that fall will be will depend on how long the lockdown will go for,” she told the Herald.
“There were a few headwinds facing the retail sector prior to this; [stalled] population growth because of the cap on immigration and the impact of [loss of] tourism activity from foreign tourists.”
Like previous lockdowns for Auckland — which accounts for 38 per cent of the nation’s economy — spending stalled, but it was not lost. Turner said it was delaying and later the economy experience a spending splurge in the months after restrictions.
She picks the same thing will happen again this time: “What we’ve seen from the past lockdowns is that a lot of spending is typically deferred so we do see a decline but often there is a strong catch-up in the next month or whenever the lockdown is lifted.”
While retail spending on durables and larger ticket items are expected to be caught up once restrictions were lifted, the spend that would have been gone on hospitality is lost.
“If we look back at August, and we look at the monthly electronic card spending figures, core retail spending fell 6.4 per cent over August, but then it lifted 6.4 per cent in September so there was that quick rebound and catch-up,” said Turner.
Economists say the wind was already beginning to “come out of the sails” of the retail sector after months of impressive spending figures. But fear among the latest community cases could accelerate this further.
Westpac said it had expected a 0.2 per cent drop in spending in January. Seasonally adjusted spending fell in November, December and January.
“It was possible we would have seen further small declines,” Turner said. “We had already started to see a bit of a slowdown or a pullback in the trend in retail spending through summer, and some of that was expected because this is the peak time for overseas tourists to be visiting and that would normally be supporting quite a lot of that retail activity, so without that and just New Zealanders, that was going to decline.”
Hospitality, however, had held up better than economists had hoped over the peak summer months, Turner said.
“What we will see is quite a large fall [in spending] on bigger items that consumers typically want to go into a store and look at and negotiate on.
“We will see a hefty dip, followed by a sharp recovery as soon as restrictions are eased,” she predicted for the next few months.
With Auckland now operating under alert level 3, that would have a “reasonable” impact on GDP and the economy, Turner said.
Economists in recent months had been learning just how resilient the NZ economy was and how quickly businesses had adapted to changes, she said. “We’ve seen over the past year, New Zealand’s economic performance has outstripped many of our peers and that’s probably because of our approach to Covid.”
According to data by NZ Post, online shopping ballooned by more than $1 billion last year.
Spending online was up by $1.2b to $5.8b compared with 2019, according to the state-owned enterprises most recent e-commerce report.
