TEST OUR BORDER WORKERS DAILY
On Sunday at 8.25pm, the nation was blasted into fight or flight mode by a blaring emergency alert informing most of us of three new Covid-19 cases in the community. As a result, New Zealand is in the midst of a three-day level 3 lockdown for Auckland and level 2 for the rest of the country.
It was upsetting news, but finding out as soon as possible - even before follow-up testing that would reveal more information about the infections - can be considered an act of care, even love, on Valentines Day.
It was part of the transparent back and forth that has marked the messaging around Covid-19. The Government trusts the public to be able to handle early and partial news and, in return, we trust that we are getting the latest updates.
Yesterday morning, the results of genomic sequencing were released, showing that the deadlier and more contagious UK variant is in our community. We should be very concerned by the increasing prevalence of Covid-19 variants but, based on overseas trends, we shouldn't be surprised. A new study shows that seven new variants are circulating in the United States, which, along with the United Kingdom, is the most common source of New Zealand's Covid-19 cases.
That's what viruses do: they mutate and, in response, so should New Zealand's border protocols. First we should widen our definition of border workers to include those people who work one step removed from the border, such as the mother in this community case, whose work involved doing laundry for international flights. Current speculation is that she may have been infected via airborne droplets from a co-worker who may have been exposed to transit passengers or air crew at Auckland airport.
Expanding the definition would increase the frequency of testing for such workers. It appears as if this case was rigorously tested while she was working, but not when she was on time off, which seems like an oversight.
Second, we should be testing this expanded pool of "border workers" more frequently. This case, and the previous Pullman Hotel ones, emphasise that our weakest point is the border. We currently test border workers weekly but we should follow the example of Australia and institute daily saliva testing of all border workers. Saliva testing is less accurate than the standard weekly tests but having seven saliva tests for every standard test surely means we get some useful information much earlier.
New Zealand has committed to a three- month trial of daily saliva tests but this latest case tips the scale in favour of not waiting for the results of the trial before we move to daily testing for all border workers.
The sacrifices being asked of us in response to such community cases are frustrating. Lockdowns and travel restrictions curtail our economy and our freedoms. But we should be grateful that the small number of cases we have to deal with means contact tracing and rapid-response level shifts and travel bans are the surgical interventions that work to prevent more spread. Most of the world has no chance of doing so as they are overwhelmed by case numbers.
So yes, we should redouble our own efforts at prevention: hand-washing, mask-wearing, and location scanning, but also recognise that efforts to keep the border secure are paramount.
