COVID CASE DID NOT ACCESS AIRPORT
One of Auckland's Covid-19 community cases was not required to undergo testing in her airline catering job because government guidelines did not require it, LSG Sky Chefs says.
The woman is one of three family members in a South Auckland household to test positive for the more infectious UK strain of Covid-19, prompting authorities to lockdown Auckland and move the rest of the country to alert level 2.
An LSG Sky Chefs spokesman said the woman worked in the laundry area of its catering facility in Mangere where she was responsible for washing and ironing linen, napkins, blankets and sheets returning from incoming flights.
Flight crew uniforms were not handled in its laundry facility. The job required no face-to-face contact with crew or travellers and had no access to the airport, the spokesman said.
A health order in place since November requires border staff to be tested every fortnight. It primarily concerns airside staff at airports, including those handling food and baggage.
The LSG Sky Chefs spokesman said regular Covid-19 surveillance testing in this case was not mandatory because the laundry area was not considered airside by government guidelines.
Even though staff in the laundry and dishwashing areas did not have face-to- face contact with crews or travellers, LSG had included them in its regular testing process, he said.
"This has been done for precautionary reasons and for the safeguarding of our employees as these areas are handling items that have been offloaded from incoming flights." He would not say which airlines it worked with.
Air New Zealand yesterday said LSG did not provide any laundry services for the airline. Air NZ was not taking food or catering items from LSG while the cases were being investigated, an airline spokeswoman said.
LSG's spokesman said staff in the laundry and dishwashing areas were provided with personal protective equipment including masks, gloves, sleeve protectors and aprons. The laundry, a separate area in its catering building, was immediately closed after receiving information from health authorities on Sunday about the positive case, he said.
After consultation with authorities, further department closures were deemed not necessary, he said.
Last year, LSG introduced a questionnaire procedure that staff must complete on arrival, he said.
If there were any ambiguities in answers to questions, the employee was immediately asked to get tested and a unit manager was notified, he said.
This had not happened in the past 10 days. Testing of all staff onsite at its catering facility was under way and all staff, including those on leave, had been asked to come to work to get tested yesterday or to get tested immediately at their nearest testing centre, he said.
After a January 18 test the worker was not tested at the next two-week mark, as she was on annual leave.
E tu spokesman Savage said the union was supporting the woman.
