CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO COVID LOAN HOLIDAYS
A mortgage holiday might seem attractive, but the reality of deferring loan repayments may have made some people look at alternatives during the coronavirus lockdown.
Banks were allowed to offer six- month repayment reductions and repayment holidays for households whose incomes had been reduced as a result of Covid-19, without having to raise more capital.
The Reserve Bank said it was considering extending the loan holiday scheme, but was also looking at "alternatives".
New Zealand Bankers' Association chief executive Roger Beaumont said almost 60,000 consumers had deferred all repayments for loans - mostly home loans - totalling $20.2 billion between the start of lockdown on March 26 and June 30.
In the same period, over 79,000 consumers reduced payments, for example to interest-only payments, for loans totalling $24 billion.
New Zealand's housing lending totals about $280 billion.
"More customers have actually taken up reduced repayments options rather than fully deferring all loan repayments," Beaumont said.
"Banks are seeing customers who have deferred or reduced payments restarting their normal payments.
"That means people know what's available when it comes to loan relief, and they also know why it's a good idea to restart payments if they can."
Kiwibank said new requests for coronavirus-related assistance had slowed to a trickle.
"Due to Covid we currently have around 2500 customers on home loan repayment deferrals and a further 3500 customers on our interest only payment options," a spokeswoman said.
"There are also about 250 customers who have opted for term extensions."
Many customers were taking a wait and see approach, and more customer enquiries were expected as the longer- term effects of Covid-19 were felt, she said.
Massey University director of banking studies David Tripe said he did not think a large number of mortgage holders had taken up the mortgage repayment deferral option, compared with Australia, despite the job losses and economic uncertainty.
"The people who've lost jobs are often younger people who are in less secure jobs who aren't homeowners, so that would be one reason for suspecting that the extent of utilisation of mortgage holidays might not have been as severe as all that," Tripe said.
"There will be some tradespeople who probably thought, I'm not going to be able to work, I'd better apply, and then six weeks later they're back at work again."
Many people who applied understood what mortgage holidays entailed, he said.
"It doesn't mean to say you never have to make payments so that's an important consideration - I wouldn't be surprised if demand for it had been somewhat limited for that reason.
"If people have been in a position to maintain payments, they probably would have done so."
Tom Hartmann from Sorted said a lot of people had been interested in mortgage deferrals during the level 4 lockdown, out of fear and in order to build reserves.
But some "started repaying much sooner than the six months, or transferred onto an interest-only option", he said.
