In brief
In brief
Controversial council callThe Dunedin City Council has approved controversial measures to entice people back to the central city after the Covid-19 lockdown. The speed limit of the main street has been slashed from 30km/h to 10km/h — a measure panned by business and motorists’ advocacy groups. Surrounding streets also had their limits lowered, pedestrians take priority over vehicles and free parking is available. The temporary measures will allow physical distancing without risk of traffic speeding by.
Law targets smugglers The Government hopes a new law cracking down on tobacco smugglers will close a $10.8 million loophole. The changes will deem tobacco a “prohibited import” and require importers to have a permit so Customs can act more quickly on suspicious parcels. Only Act voted against The Customs and Excise (Tobacco) Amendment Bill, saying smuggling would continue and the rules would mean more bureaucracy.
Arsonist sent to jail A man has been sentenced to more than three years in jail for starting fires in the tinder-dry Tasman region. Benjamin Durrant and Abigail Page were found guilty of lighting a fire on the Moutere Highway in late February last year. The pair also lit another fire on Pigeon Valley Rd in early March before being arrested. Durrant had posed as a frightened resident after one of the blazes. He was sentenced to three years and four months in jail. Page, who drove a car during both fires, was discharged without conviction.
Young vandals caught Small footprints helped police catch the vandals who damaged two West Auckland schools last weekend. Two primary school-aged vandals wreaked havoc at Kelston Primary and Kelston Intermediate schools — smashing windows, damaging doors and tipping paints and dyes onto the floor. The sinks were deliberately clogged up and the taps turned on — flooding the school’s deaf unit. About $8000 worth of damage was done.
Clement leaves policeDeputy Commissioner Mike Clement is retiring after 42 years at NZ police. Clement, deputy commissioner for national operations since 2014, will retire at the end of next month. He also led the police management of firearms law reform after last year’s March 15 terror attacks in Christchurch, including the buy-back scheme. Clement had been tipped to replace the previous Police Commissioner, Mike Bush, who stepped down last month. Just ahead of Andrew Coster’s appointment to the role, Police Minister Stuart Nash confirmed the Independent Police Conduct Authority (IPCA) had investigated Clement. The IPCA said its report would not be made public and it would not comment further.
