TIME FOR A CLEAR LOCKDOWN EXIT STRATEGY
Covid-19 and the response to it will be the only political game in town over the next few weeks. It already was really, but the Government's rapid about-face in the past couple of weeks has ensured that it will remain so.
Here's what we know.
First, Covid is here to stay. Cases are growing in Auckland, and will continue to do so. The Government has now moved from elimination to actively trying to suppress cases in Auckland until vaccine rates are considered high enough. We still don't know what level that is.
Second, it is now getting much more clinical. A few weeks ago, when the Government unveiled some data from modeller Shaun Hendy, it was presented as one scenario for what we could expect. In that modelling, Hendy predicted there could be up to 7000 deaths from Covid-19. However, that figure has been met with considerable scepticism.
But on Thursday, chief medical officer Dr Andrew Connolly and General Practice New Zealand chair Dr Jeff Lowe, along with Health Minister Andrew Little, briefed media on Covid preparedness. As expected, they were clinical and very open about the challenges the system was facing.
They too had done modelling, not in order to build a case for some policy or other, but for the very real business of readying the health system.
Their worst-case planning: 5200 cases a week north of the Bombay Hills early next year. Of these - and depending on vaccination rates - some 5 per cent to 10 per cent were expected to be hospitalised. At 5000 cases a week, that's between 250 and 500 people in hospital every week.
And those figures were just for the northern region.
It should be stressed that these figures are what the health wonks are using for their planning. As Connolly noted, the prudent thing is to plan for the worst on the basis that, if that can be handled, anything less can be.
Nevertheless, it points to a significant strain on the health system.
Little - who, it should be remembered, is the third health minister since the pandemic began - produced PowerPoint slides showing that New Zealand could scale up to 550 "ICU-capable" beds. But currently there are 320 to 340 that are at 85 per cent capacity.
Clearly, if cases do break out to the level being planned for in Auckland, there could be a crunch on ICU. The Government is now trying to get more health professionals through MIQ and is retraining some.
But it is likely to be too little too late. Both Little's predecessors in the job - David Clark and Chris Hipkins - also clearly did little in this area.
Third, Delta and its spread is now dictating the Covid policies being adopted. It is almost as if control of the outbreak has simply shifted away from the Beehive Theatrette podium and into the real world. Policy will now get a lot more responsive, and should do.
Senior politicians appearing at the 1pm media conferences will now move from actions to get rid of Covid - which were successful before Delta - to offering little more than commentary. If ministers are going to front, they need to start making decisions and levelling with Kiwis about what is going to happen and when.
In the next weeks we will see home isolation for people who catch Covid-19, and some movement around the border settings. The Government is clearly unsure about exactly when to do this. But MIQ at the border seems like a poor deployment of resources, given its current focus. A considerable liberalisation this year now seems not only possible, but probably the most prudent course of action for travellers who are double-vaccinated at the very least.
It is worth noting that, only 11 days before New Zealand's lockdown on August 17, Victoria had a run of days with single-digit cases - the state thought it was going to eliminate Covid. For the past two days, cases have hovered around 2200. It has a similar, though slightly lighter, set of restrictions to Auckland.
This Government has run a very slick PR machine around Covid, carefully calibrating both policy and announcements in line with its bigger story about elimination. That will now be impossible.
So what is required - and it needs to start happening this coming week - is the prime minister letting Kiwis, and Aucklanders in particular, know what happens next and when. Up to now the strategy - which has been reasonable - has been just to drive vaccinations as high as possible. Clearly that still should be the goal, but now a discernible and concrete plan needs to be put in place.
One of the political masterstrokes of elimination was an easily definable, national goal. That needs to be replaced.
At what rate of vaccination will we be looking to ease restrictions, including opening the Auckland border? Will it be staged, or sudden? Is there a date in mind that is being worked towards?
At the moment, basically everyone in the country is working blind. Covid is here, but there is no clear plan.
Government insiders privately worry that they can't change the message too quickly, because a lot of Kiwis are scared, and a lot don't really understand what happens next. Many in government were quite surprised by the backlash after the announcement of the step- down process in Auckland.
And there is still a fair bit of agitating from the epidemiological echo chamber for level 4 to be reinstated for Auckland.
That would be total folly, particularly now the Delta cat is out of the bag. You can't keep people locked down indefinitely, even if it were desirable - which it clearly isn't.
On Monday Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern - in the middle of a press conference - revealed something telling. The Government had looked at both New South Wales and Victoria, and tried to craft a loosening of rules in Auckland because, if it didn't, after a couple of months people would just start loosening the rules themselves. Today marks the 60th day for lockdown in Auckland.
What's needed now is clarity, and a public plan with vaccination targets and potential dates. One can, and should, be contingent on the others. But keeping the public in limbo cannot continue any longer.
