LOCKDOWN APPROACH ONLY OPTION: HIPKINS
Health Minister Chris Hipkins has backed the Government's policy and said there was no alternative to lockdown when it comes to stamping out a resurgence of Covid-19.
Meanwhile, National Party leader Judith Collins said she supported the Government's elimination strategy but the borders needed to be strengthened to avoid rolling lockdowns.
She said National would this week set out its policy on strengthening the border.
Hipkins told TVNZ's Q&A that the only alternatives to lockdown were deadly. "If you look at the countries that have tried an alternative approach, people keep pointing to Sweden.
"Nearly 6000 people died in Sweden as a result of that strategy," he said.
"There's no guarantee about an alternative strategy apart from the key guarantee that more people will die."
He said the current strategy was to get in and out of lockdown quickly.
"The strategy that we've got at the moment is still the right one.
"The key thing is if we do this well, we can get in and out of lockdown very quickly."
Collins told Q&A that she supported the elimination approach and Director- General of Health Dr Ashley Bloomfield.
But the National leader said the country needed to have better confidence in the border so that it didn't have to go into lockdown.
"It's important to have the elimination strategy - we have no chance of any herd immunity in New Zealand. But we cannot continue to be yo-yo-ing in and out of lockdown," Collins said.
She said the fiasco over the lack of testing at the border had exposed the Government's incompetence.
On Saturday, it emerged that despite the Government allegedly clamping down on the testing of staff who worked at the border and in managed isolation and quarantine facilities, only about 40 per cent of the staff at the most vulnerable facility, the Jet Park Hotel in South Auckland, were being tested every week.
"We were told several weeks ago that . . . all staff at the Jet Park were being tested every week," Hipkins told Newshub Nation on Saturday.
"The data that I have received as of yesterday suggests that actually it was only about 60 per cent, so obviously I'm very disappointed by that."
