HEADING INTO LEVEL 3: 'Keep your bubble'
Kiwis will be asked to stay at home and keep to a slightly larger "bubble" of family members if New Zealand leaves level 4 lockdown.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern provided a much-anticipated explanation of life under Covid-19 alert level 3 yesterday afternoon, saying most people will need to remain at home. Bars and cafes will remain closed.
"Just like when you're recovering from an illness, you still primarily stay home ... Many things will feel the same as they do now," she said.
New Zealand spent two days in level 3 before entering a level 4 lockdown; whether the country will re-enter the now stricter alert level 3 in a week's time remains uncertain.
Ardern and her Cabinet will decide on Monday whether New Zealand will leave lockdown at midnight the following Wednesday, April 22, or whether the most restrictive measure will be extended.
At a press conference last week, Ardern said the updated detail on the Covid-19 alert system should not be taken as an indication that New Zealand would leave lockdown next week.
If the country enters alert level 3 people will be permitted to expand their contacts to include close family members, a caregiver, children in shared care, or a defacto partner.
Construction and forestry businesses will be able to resume work, as will other businesses that can maintain physical distancing requirements. Workers will be asked to work from home where possible.
Cafes and bars, which deal with customers face-to-face, will not open. If businesses can deal with customers in a "contactless" way, they will be permitted to open, including retail, hardware and restaurants.
Early childhood centres and schools will partially reopen, for children up to the age of year 10 only. Attendance will be voluntary, meaning families who want to keep their children at home can.
People will be able to travel within a region as needed, and further movement between regions will be restricted.
Low-risk activities will be permitted as long as they are non- motorised, meaning there will be no boating but swimmers and surfers can again take to the ocean.
"You can fish from the shore. However ... Now is not the time to take up a new activity that you have never done before. It is too risky," Ardern said.
Funerals, tangihanga and weddings attended by no more than 10 people will be deemed acceptable, but food or receptions cannot take place.
"The principle here is that it is ideal that you still keep your contact with a range of other people very, very limited," Ardern said.
"Keeping in mind that many people are now going to be exposed to people in a workplace ... if you are going back to your private life and extending your exposure that causes an exponential increase to the people you're exposed to.
"With level 3, it's very gradual, it's a progressive system, and we really want to keep it as limited as possible."
Also further detailed was alert level 2, which would: allow gatherings of 100 people indoors or 500 people outdoors; sport and recreation activities; public venues such as libraries, most businesses and schools to open; and discourage non-essential travel between regions.
Ardern said New Zealand had acted early to prevent a "wave of devastation" and the country would never know what would have happened without such a lockdown.
At the press conference yesterday, director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said there were 15 new cases of Covid-19 in New Zealand. Another 42 people had recovered from the virus.
