CAN I FINALLY ORDER A FLAT WHITE NOW?
Cafes and coffee shops around the country are scrambling for ideas on if and how they will operate when New Zealand moves into alert level three from the coronavirus lockdown.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced yesterday that while bars, restaurants and cafes will remain closed in alert level three, food delivery is possible as long as it remains contactless, and social distancing, good hygiene and cleaning practises are strictly adhered to.
Several coffee shops Stuff spoke to said they were working on establishing an online ordering platform were customers could get their coffees through click and collect.
Cafes like Nikau Cafe in Wellington and Black and White Coffee Cartel said this option might not be immediately available after lockdown.
Nikau Cafe's marketing manager, Hillary Smith, said they were working on a delivery plan to ensure they could operate safely. That might mean delivery costs too.
"We will be able to implement online orders through pay and collect and delivery via our website. We are just working through the logistics of all of this at the moment," Smith said.
"This may mean either a minimum order amount or delivery fees and specific delivery zones."
Franchise Black and White Coffee Cartel, which had 12 cafes around the country, said it would be up to each individual shop if they chose to open during Alert Level three.
Manager Raphael Garcia said they were developing an online ordering service so they could reopen during alert level three.
Several other coffee shops had been preparing for a pickup, delivery service but the strict conditions recently announced by Government meant this could not be an option.
Wellington's Maranui Cafe co- owner, Bronwyn Kelly, said until New Zealand moved to a safe alert level two, her cafe would remain closed.
But they were considering operating from a smaller location, Queen Sallies Diamond Deli, for coffee delivery during this period. "We thought that there would be a takeaway option but that's not the case in level three.
"Right now, we have to go back and rejig ideas. We might consider a drive-through but whether or not that will be ready soon, we're not sure."
Some cafes, like C1 Espresso Cafe in Christchurch, have decided to remain closed.
Owner Sam Crofske said while they would love to open, the quality of service was more important.
New Zealand Specialty Coffee Association president David Burton said he wasn't expecting people to swarm to their local cafes and coffee shops when the country moved into level three.
"But we're all looking forward to reopening and providing customers with great coffees again."
