Ruapehū lockdown callRuapehū iwi Ngāti Rangi is calling for a regional lockdown...
Ruapehū lockdown callRuapehū iwi Ngāti Rangi is calling for a regional lockdown after news a person with Covid-19 visited Tūroa ski field. Ngāti Rangi chairman Whetu Moataane says the district is “not open for travellers”, especially Aucklanders. The iwi’s stance comes just days after the Taranaki Iwi Chairs’ Forum and Taranaki Mayoral Forum issued a joint statement asking for its own “regionwide bubble”. Taranaki groups were basing their view on whether the country went to alert level 3. The Māori Party also called for the borders to be closed for the next 14 days and a level 4 lockdown, and Moataane says they want a regional lockdown “regardless of the alert level”. “We all need to be extra cautious and not travel unnecessarily,” he said, adding that they had a duty to “protect and care” for their community.Fewer foreign studentsImmigration New Zealand figures show there are now fewer than 50,000 foreign students in the country.
In mid-March, there were 60,348 students with valid visas in New Zealand, but by early August that had fallen to 47,807. The figures indicate polytechnics and private training institutes had lost about a quarter of their foreign students since March, while schools and universities had lost a fifth of their students. No foreign students had been allowed into New Zealand since the borders closed to non-residents on March 19 and students from China were stopped at the start of February. However, Immigration New Zealand approved 582 new study visas in June and 633 in July. It said the visas were for people who were already in New Zealand and might include people who were eligible to study here as dependants of somebody with a work visa.Shooting investigationPolice in South Auckland were investigating a shooting reported in the early hours of yesterday. Concerned residents called 111 at about 1.30am yesterday, reporting gunshots had been fired on Alta Terrace in Clover Park. Soon after, a person turned up at Middlemore Hospital with gunshot wounds. Detective Senior Sergeant Mal Hassall said the injured person was in a moderate condition.End of the golden weatherForecasters are warning of severe weather — including heavy rain and gales — across much of New Zealand this week. The fine, sunny and frosty spell we’ve enjoyed this weekend should continue today and tomorrow but it’s set to turn from there, as a ridge of high pressure over the country moves eastwards, and a complex trough approaches the country from the Tasman Sea. “The trough should move east across New Zealand during Wednesday and early Thursday, bringing a period of heavy rain and strong northeasterlies to many places,” Metservice warns, adding it was likely to rain in Auckland for at least five days from Wednesday.
