WORKING POOR HIT THE HARDEST
South Aucklanders already struggling to feed their families could be hit hard by the stresses of a third Covid-19 lockdown, a prominent Maori leader says.
Manukau Urban Maori Authority chairman Bernie O'Donnell said since the first lockdown last year, the organisation has been helping families in south Auckland via its food bank and social services.
O'Donnell, who is also a member of the Auckland District Health Board, said most people have been focused on feeding their families and keeping a roof over their heads.
"But it's the issues we don't see, like how our psyches are impacted by this," he said.
His response on Sunday, when the Government announced Auckland was going into an alert level 3 lockdown, was to say "not again".
"If it has that impact on me, imagine what it's like for those who are struggling?"
Auckland Council economic development agency released its Prosperity Index in November last year. It found south Auckland was continuing to struggle economically. Its residents often have low paying, low skilled jobs and also experienced higher rates of benefit dependency and unemployment than the general population.
O'Donnell said the working poor have been hit hard by the economic effects of Covid-19.
"Families are all working just to live and if they've got a house they've got 10 people living in it."
Mental Health Foundation chief executive Shaun Robinson said he shares O'Donnell's concerns.
"It's very clear from our experience with the lockdowns and the disruption of job losses have had an impact on mental health and emotional and mental wellbeing. The relationship between lower incomes and poorer mental wellbeing has been well studied," he said.
"It's bad enough to lose your job due to Covid-19, but it's really bad if it pushes your family into poverty and affects your mental wellbeing and causes a downward spiral.
"A lot of families in south Auckland have been pushed into that lower income bracket."
He said south Auckland's Maori, Pasifika and Asian communities have also had to deal with stigma and racism directed at them due to Covid-19.
"For people already struggling with their mental health, the lockdowns pushed some into a worse space mentally."
He said it is important people look out for one another and keep in contact with family and friends, as well as exercise and eat well.
University of Auckland associate professor of psychology Danny Osborne said O'Donnell had legitimate concerns.
"Mental wellbeing is something we should be concerned about," he said.
Osborne was involved in research last year as part of the New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study.
It surveyed 1000 New Zealanders during the first two weeks of level 4 lockdown. The results were then compared to a pre-lockdown control group who had answered the same questions in late 2019.
Osborne said the factors that triggered increased psychological distress are things most people could relate to.
"There's the stress of parenting issues and homeschooling your kids and balancing work-life demands."
But Osborne said the study didn't find any evidence of any enduring long-term effects on the mental health of the people who took part in the research.
