‘Home help’ NCEA credits slammed
Auckland Grammar head says NZQA have ‘succumbed to mediocrity’
New guidelines that will let students get qualification credits for helping out at home during the Covid-19 lockdown have been slammed as “succumbing to mediocrity”.
The guidelines, issued by the NZ Qualifications Authority, will allow credits towards the National Certificate of Educational Assessment (NCEA) for activities such as buying groceries for the family, working part-time, voluntary community work and “identifying and managing stress”.
They recognise the disruption to learning caused by the eight-week physical closure of schools from March 23 until all students were asked to return on May 18.
But Auckland Grammar School headmaster Tim O’Connor said they would “demean the rigour of the national qualification”.
“It is a shame that after NZQA had taken positive steps forward to make NCEA a creditable qualification, they have succumbed to mediocrity by allowing ‘help around the home’, ‘part-time work’ and ‘voluntary work’ to be assessed and awarded credits on our national qualification framework,” he said.
The National Party’s new education spokeswoman Nicola Willis, appointed after former minister Nikki Kaye resigned yesterday, said it was “easy to see this approach could be open to abuse”.
“For this to work, teachers will need absolute confidence that standards granted for work at home are just as rigorously assessed as standards granted for work done at school. That’s a big ask,” she said.
However Secondary Principals Association president Deidre Shea said the provisions would only be used for a few “specific individual cases”.
“It’s really for students who have been particularly challenged through circumstances in terms of the learning programme they had been planning,” she said.
“I’m thinking here particularly of a student who didn’t have access to online learning and has been disadvantaged in other ways. This is credentialing learning that matters and can move them quite well on to certain next steps. It’s the last piece of the puzzle to give support to schools so that they can manage the process in a valid way.”
It follows decisions announced last month to give students one bonus credit for every five that they earn towards NCEA this year up to a maximum of 10 bonus points at level 1 and eight at levels 2 and 3.
Shea said there was “considerable consultation” with schools about the guidelines. “The only concern was around making sure that the learning was verified,” she said.
“It can seem to be relatively easy credits, but they have existed for some time because they actually do have a purpose in a learning pathway.”
