BNZ WARNS HOUSE PRICES NEAR UNSUSTAINABLE LEVELS
'Over-zealous' investors are at risk of pushing New Zealand house prices to unsustainably high levels, warns the BNZ.
The property market has heated up significantly since the end of the alert level 4 coronavirus lockdown, thanks in part to low interest rates, the temporary removal of loan-to-value ratio (LVR) restrictions, and a lack of homes for sale.
The economy is in recession, but many parts of the country are seeing record high median prices with people flocking to buy properties.
First home buyers made up a record high portion of the market over the last three months, and property investors are busier than last year, according to CoreLogic.
"Whatever the justification for current [and future prices] we caution there will become a point in time when over-zealous investors push prices to simply non- sustainable levels," BNZ head of research Stephen Toplis said yesterday.
If house prices keep rising compared to people's income and rents, owning a house will become an untenable option for a greater proportion of the population, he said.
"Ultimately, prices will then have to move.
"When senior folk amongst the real estate fraternity start to express concern about the sustainability of current price increases, you know something must be amiss."
House prices were about 30 per cent overvalued compared to gross domestic product, 66 per cent overvalued compared to earnings - having jumped sharply since 2019 - and also overvalued compared to United States house prices, according to the BNZ.
However, house prices were undervalued compared to past immigration, and were just above average compared to other countries, based on price to income ratio and the price to rent ratio.
Low interest rates were undoubtedly boosting house prices, and the Reserve Bank wanted to see that continue, Toplis said.
"Bank officials have gone so far as to say that they remain much more fearful of falling house prices than they are of continued house price appreciation."
The central bank was hoping that rising house prices would increase consumer spending, helping drive the economy.
Consumer spending was holding up, Toplis said, but that was also partly due to New Zealanders being forced to spend their tourism dollars at home, pent up demand as a result of coronavirus lockdowns, massive fiscal stimulus, and the mortgage deferral scheme which had freed up some cash for borrowers.
Toplis said house prices were not necessarily out of kilter at present, but there were risks posed by further "aggressive" increases.
There was the concern that owners of increasingly valuable houses would fare disproportionately better than people who did not own them.
The market was defying widespread predictions earlier this year of a significant slowdown. It had been expected that house prices could drop as much as 15 per cent this year as the effect of Covid-19 was felt on the economy.
"In our analysis of the market we had assumed that a combination of slumping net migration, soaring unemployment and ongoing modest supply would drive prices lower," Toplis said.
Migration still did not appear to be a strong driver of the property market, he said, but the unemployment rate did not look like it would hit the heights expected, and the supply of new houses was better than expected.
That left interest rates, along with other Reserve Bank policy, as the key driver of house price rises.
"Despite our short-term positive view on house prices, we can't help but think the underlying drivers will eventually weigh on the market," Toplis said.
"That said, the impact of such will be highly dependent on the timing of the resolution of the Covid-19 problem."
Once the world got on top of Covid-19 and borders reopened, net migration into New Zealand was likely to soar and again underwrite the property market.
