Protest: Police to lay charges
Potential for virus to spread as 2000 gather on Auckland Domain in ‘significant breach’ of level 3 restrictions
Police have described yesterday’s anti-lockdown protest in Auckland as a “significant breach of Covid-19 alert level 3 requirements” and plan to lay charges against organisers.
And a Covid-19 expert says the protest and others around New Zealand could further spread the virus.
About 2000-plus people congregated on an Auckland Domain field — many without masks — during the event.
Police officers observed the rally including taking photos.
The protest was on the same day as the Government made its vaccine push in the Super Saturday campaign.
Auckland City district commander superintendent Shanan Gray said the gathering at the Auckland Domain was in breach of alert level 3 restrictions, which limits gatherings to weddings, funerals and tangihanga with no more than 10 people.
“While those in attendance generally conducted themselves in a calm manner and adhered to rules around mask-wearing and distancing between smaller separate bubbles, the gathering was by its very nature a significant breach of Covid-19 alert level 3 requirements,” Gray said.
No arrests were made but police confirmed they will take prosecution action against a number of individual organisers in the coming days.
The Freedom & Rights Coalition last night claimed about 6000 people attended. It also said more than 1000 people organised the event.
Covid-19 expert Professor Michael Baker was hesitant to characterise the so-called “Freedom NZ” protests as potential super spreader events.
But the University of Otago epidemiologist did say Covid transmission was likely occurring at them, and the protests were a corrosive form of “antisocial behaviour”.
“I don’t always throw the super spreading label around. It’s mainly related to indoor events just because of how the virus goes,” Baker said.
“Super spreading usually requires an indoor environment where you have a single person who can fire out aerosols and affect a lot of people around them and we’ve seen that in Auckland, obviously with the Samoan Assembly of God.”
But Baker said the unchecked mingling and shouting at Auckland Domain and in Kensington Park, Whangārei, where 1000 people gathered, made some form of Covid-19 transmission likely.
Protests had also been planned in Mt Maunganui, Whakatāne, Gisborne, Havelock North, Wellington, Nelson and Christchurch.
“It certainly has good potential to result in transmission of the virus because obviously there’s mixing at the event, people are going out of their bubbles,” Baker said.
“They’ll also be mixing before and after the event and people will be sharing transport.”
Above Auckland Domain a light aircraft had a banner to counter the “freedom” protest, reading “Love NZ — Get Your Jab Bro”.
Destiny Church leader Brian Tamaki told the Auckland rally he was the person arrested last week over a protest on October 2 in the Domain which he helped organised.
He said earlier in the week that he intended to go to Auckland Domain to have a picnic this weekend.
Tamaki said yesterday he was ashamed of the Government keeping people hostage in their homes.
Tamaki’s October 2 protest drew around 2000 people.
That protest led to Tamaki being charged with breaking the Health Act.
A witness to yesterday’s protest said it was more boisterous and generated more crowd support than the one two weeks ago and speakers said they won’t back down.
Police confirmed on Friday they were aware of the planned event.
“Police will be monitoring the situation on the day and responding accordingly.”
Police recognise and respect people’s lawful right to protest, a statement said, however will continue to encourage people to adhere to the alert level restrictions.
“Police do have the ability to take enforcement action for those found to be breaching the restrictions currently in place, and those responsible for organising such protests may be prosecuted.”
