AUCKLAND CASES WILL STOP ALERT LEVEL SHIFT
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has said an alert level drop outside of Auckland won't come until the city's lockdown stops new Covid-19 infections but a top epidemiologist warns stopping transmission among essential workers and in deprived households is an effort that could take weeks.
Cabinet will review the nation's pandemic settings on Monday having agreed in principle to move Auckland down to alert level 3 from midnight Tuesday. But Ardern said yesterday the rest of the country won't move down from level 2 until Auckland's Delta outbreak is brought to heel.
New community cases would crop up over the next few weeks due to transmission among essential workers and as a result of deep- rooted inequalities, University of Otago epidemiologist Michael Baker said.
"One is that you have got essential workers, 15 per cent of the workforce has to go off and go to place where they will mix with each other and one of the biggest mixing vessels of all is hospital settings," he said.
"Overlapping that is where life is a real struggle, people staying in lounges and garages, so some of this is structural problems in society. Some people have substance addictions and also mental health and psychiatric illnesses.
"There's enough in those groups for it to go on for some weeks as it's so infectious," he said.
Baker said those people needed to be tested and vaccinated as a matter of urgency but it was difficult for public health units to make contact with hard-to-reach groups.
"This is about promoting a trusting environment where people have no hesitation about coming forward for testing."
Cases have been dropping since early this month. On Monday, 33 new community cases were reported, dropping to 15 on Tuesday, 14 on Wednesday and 13 on Thursday. But Ardern said the country outside of Auckland would move to level 1 only when there was no risk of community transmission.
Ardern also announced pandemic restrictions at level 1 won't change in response to the more contagious Delta variant, while Cabinet will also consider whether to increase the hospitality cap under level 2 from 50 to 100 on Monday.
"We wanted to give a forward preview of our direction of travel businesses have rightly been asking if we can give signals, in order for them to best prepare."
