Statistics don’t tell full story
When New Zealand was about to go into lockdown last month, Jacinda Ardern supporters quickly moved to head off negative overseas commentary by posting selected stats on social media. They used data such as unemployment, GDP and Covid-19 deaths per million people and compared our performance with the likes of the UK and US.
In hindsight, that offensive can be backed up by yesterday’s GDP figure which showed the domestic economy was humming prior to the Delta outbreak that threw us back into lockdown. GDP rose 2.8 per cent in the June 2021 quarter — well ahead of market estimates — and culminated in a 17.4 per cent bounce from the same quarter last year, following the first lockdown-affected period.
The big question is, will we see the same bounce-back in economic activity post this current lockdown? Some economists, and major retailers like Briscoe Group, are optimistic, albeit with a big caveat of how long Auckland will remain constrained above level 2.
The market is starting to refactor in interest rate rises, increasing the odds of the Reserve Bank opting for a 50 basis point hike on October 6.
Briscoe managing director Rod Duke noted in his company’s results announcement earlier this week that based on last year’s experience, “pent-up” demand would drive strong sales from October. That gave Briscoe confidence to forecast full-year net profit above last year’s record $73.2 million.
The counter to all this are the factors that came into play earlier this year such as the global supply chain challenges and chronic labour shortages. Those will hinder companies’ ability to ramp up production, make investment decisions and implement growth strategies. Alongside that is the fact that the cold data reflected in the GDP number and unemployment stats don’t reflect the human cost of these past five weeks, and the toll on hospitality and tourism operators especially.
More than 18 months into the global pandemic, many Auckland businesses simply can’t pivot any further and are finally making the decision to shut up shop for good [see our story on A20].
One tourist operator told the Herald it had been death by a thousand cuts.
The same goes for the hospitality sector, with no one able to get clear guidance from the Government about operating economically in different levels and the key question of what happens post vaccination.
Finance Minister Grant Robertson appears to be relying on the same sort of rebound from this lockdown as experienced last year. But he must be aware that the economic environment is different due to the supply chain and labour market difficulties and the fact that a lot of the rebound was fuelled by fiscal support.
At the same time, customer demand has changed with more people working from home.
Like most things Covid-related, only time will give us the definitive answer to these questions.
