PRISON LOCKOUT FOR LOCKDOWN 'TOO FAR'
Corrections may have gone too far with its near total "lockout" during the coronavirus lockdown, the human rights commissioner says.
Chief human rights commissioner Paul Hunt agreed it was of the utmost importance to keep the Covid-19 coronavirus out of prisons but the near total lockout of visitors went too far and should be revised.
The ban included visitors whose job it was to independently monitor the way people in detention were affected and that seemed an excessive restriction, he said.
At first, it appeared the ban included Ombudsman who had a role in monitoring prisoner welfare, but the Corrections Department later clarified those visits could continue, if approved beforehand. Hunt said monitoring bodies such as Ombudsman should have unrestricted access.
Suspending all other visits risked exposing vulnerable people to panic, despair, and worsening mental and physical health, Hunt said.
If prison staff could come and go the same precautions should allow monitoring inspectors access to prisons.
He made his comments in a letter to a lawyer specialising in human rights, Tony Ellis, and it was copied to members of Parliament's epidemic response committee, the Chief Ombudsman, and the Department of Corrections. Ellis had asked the Human Rights Commission to look at the ban.
"In times of emergency, governments wield extra-ordinary powers which must be kept in check through independent and accessible monitoring," Hunt wrote.
The ban had also stopped Visiting Justices going to prisons, which Corrections seemed to have no power to do, he said. Visiting Justices are justices of the peace or lawyers appointed to go into prisons, interview any prisoners, inquire into alleged abuses, and look at the treatment and conduct of prisoners.
The ban also includes lawyers acting for prisoners. However, Corrections says it has added another way for lawyers to contact their clients via audio-visual links since access to AVL booths at courts could be restricted during the epidemic lockdown.
So far no cases of Covid-19 have been confirmed in New Zealand prisons. Prisoners entering the facilities are being kept separate for 14 days and anyone with virus-type symptoms is isolated.
Corrections acknowledged banning family visits was "incredibly tough" for the prisoners and their families.
