On the brink of one of the biggest monetary policy statements in years, the...
On the brink of one of the biggest monetary policy statements in years, the latest Covid-19 lockdown could force a last minute re-think for the Reserve Bank.
The RBNZ had been widely expected to lift the official cash rate today at 2pm but Infometrics principal economist Brad Olsen now thinks the Bank should hold the OCR.
The Kiwi dollar fell sharply this afternoon as odds on a rate hike shifted. It dipped by more than half a cent from US70.18c to US69.57c to after the news broke at 2pm.
Following news of the lockdown at 6.20pm it dipped further and was trading at US$69.34c by 6.30pm.
“The market was positioned for the big monetary policy statement, which was going to hike rates,” said Westpac senior markets strategist Imre Speizer. “I think everyone has got to re-think what we will get tomorrow,” he said.
“We will probably still get a hike, but the commentary might be different as a result of this event.” Economists were all forecasting a 25-basis-point hike to the official cash rate, taking it to 0.5 per cent.
That expectation was based on growing heat in the economy, with annual inflation running at 3.3 per cent and unemployment having fallen to four per cent.
Olsen said he thought staying on hold was now the safest call.
“We think RBNZ might be best to hold off on any changes until a more appropriate time like the next Monetary Policy Review in six weeks,” Olsen said.
“A short, sharp lockdown would mean the New Zealand economy emerges with the same economic and inflationary pressures as we faced before the case announcement.
“A rise in the OCR is still needed, but given the circumstances it might be best to wait a breath tomorrow“.
ANZ senior markets strategist David Croy said the Kiwi dollar had taken a knock on the news.
“The Kiwi has got hit pretty hard, both against the US dollar and the Aussie.
“Really, it’s just the market jumping to the view that, given the 100 per cent of recent cases at the border have been Delta cases, the market is assuming that there is a high chance of this case being Delta.
“People are looking at the situation overseas and in Australia and drawing parallels to here in terms of how Covid could unfold. That clearly has reflected negatively in the exchange rate,” he said.
The market had priced in a 25-basis-point rise in the official cash rate at tomorrow’s announcement. Croy said he expected the Reserve Bank to approve the hike. “But this shifts the profile as to what might happen further down the track.”
Matt Goodson, managing director of Salt Funds Management, said the market turned down sharply on the news of the Covid community case, but the fall was partly sheltered by the knee-jerk reaction to buy Fisher and Paykel Healthcare.
“It does put a question mark on the OCR move by the bank, but inflationary pressure is a very real thing,” Goodson said.
The NZX-50 ended the day down 0.67 per cent at 12,635.
