THE BIG POLITICAL ISSUES TO WATCH IN 2022
'T is the season for crystal ball-gazing. The first half of 2021 was mostly one of positivity: the trans- Tasman bubble was due to open up, there was no Covid-19 in the community and, compared with the rest of the world, life looked pretty sweet - with the notable exception of the closed border.
The second half of the year was much harder. Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins became a very highly paid travel agent as the bubble deflated, before popping. Then Delta arrived, plunging the nation into lockdown and Auckland into a very extended one.
But the rest of politics continued along, and the elevation of Christopher Luxon to National Party leader will reset the parliamentary vibe for next year. Under Luxon's leadership, National now presents a credible threat to Jacinda Ardern's Government.
But as with credible threats in national security parlance, those threats do not necessarily become realised. The 2023 election is still nearly two years away. While next year it looks like economics will take centre stage - particularly with elevated levels of inflation likely to stick around for most of the year - it is anyone's guess what issues will have captured the public's interest come election time.
Here are some areas that, at this stage, look like being big and important issues next year.
Inflation
Inflation is currently running at 4.9 per cent and is forecast to continue running hot until at least the middle of next year.
While there is significant argument over both the extent to which it is temporary and the degree to which it is an international, as opposed to domestic, phenomenon, it will bite. That is because the price of items is rising faster than wages, meaning most people are falling behind.
The interesting thing is that inflation is taking place against a bunch of other measures that traditionally are excellent for the Government. Economic growth is running hot at 4.6 per cent for the year, even with a lockdown- induced 3.7 per cent contraction last quarter. Unemployment is extremely low at 3.4 per cent, and the Treasury expects it to fall to 3.1 per cent. The government books are projected to be back in surplus by 2023.
The Government's problem is that, while just about everyone who wants a job has one - which is great - if people feel they are going backwards they will likely get grumpy. The Opposition's problem is the extent to which, given the pandemic, people are likely to blame the Government for it.
Three Waters
This has, without a doubt, been National's best issue. Before being elevated to the leadership, Luxon was responsible for local government, and that meant Three Waters. It's a bizarre issue on which to have been so successful, and probably speaks to poor political management by the Government. It is unclear quite why so much political capital has been tied up in this particular issue, which, for most voters, amounts to nothing more than a restructuring of water services to manage them more rationally.
That has turned into a fight with many local government figures over "democracy". A big part of the issue appears to be an opposition to iwi representation on the four new entities that will take over running water assets, while retaining councils as sort-of shareholders.
The Government will most likely have to reset in this area in the new year. While council opposition to the reforms appears strong, as with everything in local politics, council views shouldn't necessarily be misread as community opposition. But time will tell.
Health
The most remarkable thing about the health reforms - another centralising move from the Government - is how little opposition there has been to ditching the 20 district health boards and folding them into one big entity, Health NZ, which will be split into four regions.
This is probably because few people know who sits on these boards, or how having a patina of democracy helps deliver better health outcomes.
While next year will not be a big milestone year for the reforms, it will be the one in which the size and scope of the Maori Health Authority starts to take shape.
What this authority looks like, and how precisely it will better serve Maori, is an open question. The Government risks copping it from both those who think it unnecessary, and those who think it is a good idea that doesn't go far enough.
Geopolitics
This will continue to bubble away as New Zealand works out how to navigate living under the security umbrella of the Unites States while also maintaining an open and cordial trade and diplomatic relationship with China. Far from being "panda-huggers", as some analysts in Australia characterise the Ardern Government, the balance has so far been well struck.
New Zealand has signed up to the language of a "free and open Indo-Pacific", and the latest Defence assessment and new national security priorities have a clear tinge to them: China is a friend, and must be treated with respect, but it is also clearly the main strategic rival in the region.
This will only become a bigger issue in a world of geostrategic competition, and the pressure for New Zealand to "choose sides" is likely to become stronger.
Climate change
The rubber will meet the road next year with New Zealand's first Emissions Reduction Plan, which will be released with or around the Budget. This will finally give a plan on how and where the Government will concentrate emissions reduction efforts.
For many years, both sides of politics have tried to pretend that climate is important but that no- one will have to pay. That is now changing. Managing the politics of that will be a challenge for the Government, but also for the Opposition. For Luxon, in particular, coming up with a credible set of climate policies while also not treating farmers like villains - which he says the Government does - will be a particular challenge.
And finally - Covid under the bed
It has been a long year and a tough one. The emergence of Omicron is a reminder that there is still Covid water to flow under the bridge. The vaccine rollout has been phenomenal, but has come at the uncomfortable moral cost of effectively mandating healthcare for a small group of people.
It is also difficult to express how hard lockdowns have been on certain parts of the community. The traffic light system, in its infancy, will hopefully - but not definitely - end that.
Up to now the argument has been, in general, that the health response is the best economic response. That's fine as far as it goes, and has mostly been the case to date. But should those two things become decoupled as the trade-offs around health become sharper, it will get much harder for the Government.
My crystal ball could, of course, be a bit foggy from a long year, but those are some things to think about for the summer.
Merry Christmas.
