AUCKLAND MOVES TO LEVEL 2, rest of NZ gets level 1
Auckland moved to Covid-19 alert level 2 at midnight yesterday, with the rest of the country moving to alert level 1.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced yesterday afternoon that a snap lockdown, put in place after the announcement of three community cases on Sunday, would not continue.
Early optimism that the country would shift down alert levels had been dampened at lunchtime with news of a further two community cases linked to the cases announced on Sunday.
A further household contact of these two cases also tested positive yesterday, Director-General of Heath Dr Ashley Bloomfield said in a 4.30pm update.
However, there were clear epidemiological links between all the cases, and the cases were contained, lessening the risk, he said.
Cabinet will review the alert levels again on Monday, Ardern said, to see if Auckland can join the rest of the country at level 1.
The exception to level 2 rules in Auckland is Papatoetoe High School, which will remain closed this week. Staff and students will be expected to return a negative test before returning to school next week, Bloomfield said. He assured people that the two students identified as positive cases yesterday were not at school when they were infectious.
Other schools across Auckland will be able to reopen this morning, and businesses will also be able to operate as normal.
Ardern reminded people of the rules of level 2, including the "three S's" at bars and restaurants, where patrons must be seated, separated and served by a single server.
She urged Aucklanders to observe the level 2 rules over the weekend, especially regarding social gatherings, which are limited to 100 people.
The first cases in the latest community outbreak were announced on Sunday, sparking the 72-hour lockdown in Auckland and a shift to level 2 for the rest of the country.
The decision was made based on the assumption that one of the more transmissible strains of the virus had got into the community, which was proved correct the following day when it was confirmed to be the UK variant.
Ardern defended the decision to ramp up alert levels, saying 72 hours of stricter restrictions was preferable to 72 hours where community transmission was allowed to spread unchecked.
"We chose the balanced and cautious approach," she said.
However, the decision to shift down levels has attracted criticism from Professor Nick Baker, an epidemiologist, who said it was not cautious enough. With no clear conclusion as to how the virus got out into the community, and test results still pending, Baker said it would have been "more prudent" to have moved Auckland to level 2.5, which involves harsher restrictions on gathering sizes.
Auckland mayor Phil Goff welcomed the move to level 2 for Auckland but urged people to continue following precautions.
"Today's cases show us a short, sharp lockdown was necessary to hit this outbreak on the head . . . The vital thing now is for people to continue scanning their QR codes and get tested if they are feeling unwell."
