No show on QR code charge
In first case in NZ, cafe owner blames virus threat for absence from court yesterday
An Auckland cafe owner facing prosecution for failing to display Covid-19 QR codes has refused to appear in court, seemingly concerned about the threat of the virus during the city’s lockdown.
Dilip Rupa, the first person in New Zealand to face court action for not presenting an official Covid Tracer App code at Rupa’s cafe, was due to stand before a judge yesterday.
“I’m an asthmatic — there is no way I’m going to go into an environment like that,” the businessman told the Herald after missing his hearing at court.
The Freemans Bay cafe was visited by police and WorkSafe and Rupa was issued a directive letter before two $300 infringement notices in September and October, WorkSafe said.
After allegedly continuing to refuse to display a QR poster, Rupa was charged under section 26 of the Covid-19 Public Health Response Act 2020. But Rupa told the Herald the dispute should never have gone to court and his rights have been violated.
In court, WorkSafe prosecutor Ben Finn said he understood Rupa was representing himself in the case but hadn’t seen him at the Auckland District Court precinct yesterday.
Just as Judge Tony Fitzgerald was considering issuing an arrest warrant for the tardy businessman, the court’s registrar handed him an email printed on A4 paper. “Mr Rupa is unable to attend court,” Judge Fitzgerald read aloud. “He is in the vulnerable persons category — asthmatic.” However, both Judge Fitzgerald and Finn were seemingly unimpressed by Rupa’s late attempts to contact the court and explain his situation.
“We’re keen to ensure people are kept safe, but there is a process to be followed,” Finn said.
Judge Fitzgerald decided to maintain Rupa’s bail until a next court hearing on March 3, of which the cafe owner will be notified.
When phoned by the Herald after the hearing, Rupa said: “I’m an angry man because I’ve had my rights violated. My main objection to the QR code is no one knows what the coding is ... there’s no security and there’s no knowledge of where this QR coding is going.”
Rupa said he also held concerns over privacy and how a QR code could be used.
“I have no trust in the Government and I have no trust in the corrupt court system we have.”
He claimed, including in a series of online videos, he was not required to display a QR code because his cafe uses alternative tracing methods, including a manual sign-in book.
But Rupa told the Herald his cafe has now been forced by authorities to show QR codes.
If convicted, Rupa faces a maximum penalty of six months’ imprisonment or a fine up to $4000.
Both of his infringement notices remain unpaid, WorkSafe told the Herald.
Yesterday was not the first time Rupa has failed to appear in court after being charged in November.
His first appearance was due to be on January 5, however, Rupa did not show.
