In brief
In brief
Police appeal gym camera casePolice are appealing a judge’s decision to grant a high-level government manager who planted a spy camera in the bathroom of an Auckland gym a discharge without conviction and permanent name suppression. The man had almost 40,000 images of unsuspecting gym users on his device. The secrecy around the case was driven in part by the man getting a promotion just before the Covid-19 lockdown and fear that his job and workplace would be negatively affected if his name and details of his offending went public. Police confirmed yesterday that a notice of appeal had been filed. Auckland Council chief namedFormer ACC and Westpac executive Jim Stabback has been announced as Auckland Council’s new chief executive. Prior to that, he held executive leadership positions at the Bank of Queensland, Telstra Corporation and Commonwealth Bank of Australia. He will be paid $600,000, less than his predecessor Stephen Town’s $698,000 salary .
Not guilty plea in police death caseThe man charged in relation to a crash that killed an off-duty police officer has appeared in court and pleaded not guilty to serious driving charges. Russell John Tunnicliffe, 61, appeared in the Papakura District Court yesterday. He is facing charges of careless driving causing the death of Constable Naomi McRae on February 13 this year. McRae, 35, was on her way to start her shift as a police officer in the Counties Manukau District when she was involved in a collision. She was airlifted to Auckland City Hospital in a critical condition and placed on life support, but later died. Tunnicliffe has also pleaded not guilty to careless driving causing injury and making a false statement in a logbook and exceeding the maximum period for continuous work while subject to work time restrictions.Tunnicliffe will next appear in court in September.
Officers want name suppression Three police officers accused of manslaughter after a man died in custody have argued for their names to remain secret until they go to trial. The three officers earlier pleaded not guilty to the charges, which relate to the death of a 55-year-old man at the Hawera police station in the early hours of June 1 last year.
The officers appeared in the High Court at New Plymouth yesterday for arguments on name suppression, with Justice Simon France reserving his decision, which he will release in writing at a later date. All evidence and submissions made about the suppression have also been suppressed. All three officers have been stood down from their duties, with an “employment process” to follow in due course.
Woman admits coke smuggling
An American woman has admitted smuggling cocaine into New Zealand hidden inside puffer jackets. Jamie Hudson Mendez, 44, was caught with 2.5kg of highly pure cocaine lined inside five jackets in her luggage at Christchurch International Airport last September. Authorities claimed the illegal Class-A drug had a street value of around $875,000. It’s understood she had flown to New Zealand from Zimbabwe via Ethiopia and Singapore, and her travel had come to the attention of Customs officers. Customs arrested and charged Mendez, from Phoenix, Arizona with importation. Her lawyer Pip Hall QC confirmed that Mendez had pleaded guilty to an importation charge. She remains in custody and will be sentenced on September 17.
Taser use ‘not justified’Police accept that an officer’s use of a Taser in Dunedin cells last year was not justified. The Independent Police Conduct Authority found the officer’s use of force against an aggressive detainee was unjustified, because she had other options. The officer used a Taser after the man challenged and moved towards her.
Southern police district commander Superintendent Paul Basham said the officer felt threatened but police accepted the authority’s finding that using a Taser was not the most appropriate option.
