RESTRICTING FREEDOMS AN INTERNATIONAL TOOL
After months of restrictions, Aucklanders will be out of lockdown and able to travel outside the region in four weeks' time - but things will look vastly different for those who are vaccinated against Covid-19 and those who aren't.
Yesterday, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced that only fully vaccinated people or those who have had a negative test will be permitted to leave Auckland when the border lifts on December 15.
Before that happens, the country will have transitioned into the traffic light framework which introduces further restrictions for unvaccinated New Zealanders, following a Cabinet review on November 29.
The introduction of vaccine passes will see unvaccinated people unable to visit bars, restaurants and many venues.
New Zealand has high vaccination coverage: 91 per cent of eligible New Zealanders have had their first dose, and 82 per cent are fully vaccinated.
"We know there are some still making the decision over when to be vaccinated - but we need to make decisions now that will protect them and others," Ardern said yesterday.
When the country moves into the traffic light system, New Zealand will not be alone in restricting freedoms to those who have not been vaccinated.
Queensland, in Australia, will bar unvaccinated people from restaurants, cafes, pubs and sports stadiums from mid- December.
In Wales, an NHS Covid Pass - which shows the person is either fully vaccinated or has had a negative test result within 48 hours - is required to enter nightclubs, cinemas, theatres, and large indoor/outdoor events.
And in Singapore, those unvaccinated by choice will no longer be able to get free treatment for Covid-19.
Just this week, Austria placed about 2 million people who have not been fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in lockdown for at least 10 days, as the country faces a surge in cases.
Unvaccinated people (over the age of 12) are only allowed to leave home for limited reasons, such as work or to buy food.
About 65 per cent of Austria's population is fully vaccinated - one of the lowest rates in Western Europe, the BBC reported.
Parts of Germany are also introducing similar restrictions for unvaccinated people.
In Saxony, only people who can prove they have been vaccinated or have recovered from Covid will be allowed entry to non-essential shops and facilities; and in North Rhine-Westphalia unvaccinated people are excluded from all non-essential facilities and events, The Guardian reported on Tuesday.
Epidemiologist and University of Otago (Wellington) professor Michael Baker said there were a number of positives with the traffic light system, not least that it "sends an unequivocal message" people must be vaccinated if they want to have certain freedoms.
He likened it to passive smoking: sitting next to someone in a restaurant, plane or movie theatre who lights up a cigar can put you at an increased risk. The same is true for sitting next to an unvaccinated person, even if you are vaccinated.
Baker said restrictions for unvaccinated people made sense from a public health and ethics perspective - just like banning smoking indoors made sense.
Restrictions for unvaccinated people under the impending traffic light system put a "damper" on that behaviour.
Despite that, Baker believed the move to dissolve Auckland's border in a month's time was "premature".
He expected Covid-19 would reach "every corner of the North Island" by the end of summer.
