Lockdown Xmas real risk for city ‘Circuit-breaker’ a way out, says expert
This weekend’s Super Saturday “vaxathon” has inched Auckland closer to a double-dose milestone of 90 per cent — but a Covid-19 modeller warns the city still risks facing Christmas in lockdown without a circuit-breaker.
A total 9039 first jabs were administered across Auckland on Saturday, along with 32,042 second doses, amid the nationwide vaccination push.
A shortfall of 20,360 vaccinations left Auckland “tantalisingly close” to the region reaching the 90 per cent mark for first doses, director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said.
With the current local daily average of 4000 first doses, however, that threshold could be reached this week.
Covid-19 modeller Professor Shaun Hendy said once Auckland reached the point where 90 per cent of its over-12s had been vaccinated, hard restrictions could be eased.
“But all of this is contingent on having low case numbers, because it assumes that we can stay in the game with contact tracing,” Hendy said.
“At the moment, I think the number of unlinked cases we are seeing means contact tracers are really under the pump, and can’t sustain what they’re doing for much longer.
“If we’d had that 90 per cent double-dose level for two weeks, and we had the ability to contact trace, we could get to that situation where we don’t have to rely on lockdowns.”
Yesterday saw 51 new cases in the community — 47 in Auckland and four in the Waikato — with 28 of the cases linked.
Auckland’s coverage for full vaccination stood at 1,013,594 people, 71 per cent of the eligible population. All the while, experts have warned that daily case counts have been growing on a trajectory where the number of new cases was doubling around every 12 days.
Deputy Prime Minister Grant Robertson has also warned cases will soon hit triple digits, with the number of daily cases expected to double by the end of this month.
He singled out rule breakers being the main contributor to rising case numbers.
Yesterday footage on social media of a large party on Auckland’s North Shore left many infuriated, with mayor Phil Goff labelling attendees “selfish people choosing to behave like idiots” and a health expert warning it has “all the makings of a super-spreader event”.
On Friday, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern told the Herald the primary source of growth in the outbreak wasn’t in workplaces but households interacting under lockdown.
“So for us, it’s about what will work, what makes a difference. And we’ll keep asking our public health advisers for that advice and to date, they have not advised us to change the alert level.”
Instead, the Government is poised to this week announce a new “traffic light” system, which incorporates vaccine certificates and is meant to replace alert levels when the population is highly vaccinated.
The general feedback was that it wasn’t fit for for purpose, and its usefulness was for a time when enough of the population was fully vaccinated.
Around 15 per cent of the country’s eligible population still remained unvaccinated.
Concerningly, the Ministry of Health’s public health director Dr Caroline McElnay last week revealed that just 170 to 180 new cases would put pressure on the contact tracing system.
The ministry has already stopped counting subclusters in Auckland because there were so many unlinked cases.
Hendy said New Zealand might have been well placed to move into a new stage of its pandemic response had it not been for the worsening Delta outbreak.
“If you’d talked to me a few months ago, before this outbreak, I would have said New Zealand would be in a good position, because we could enter this next phase with low case numbers,” Hendy said.
But when case numbers were high, he explained, public health systems like test-trace-quarantine couldn’t operate well enough.
“The concern at the moment is we are possibly on the cusp of where our contact tracing and other targeted public health interventions will start to fall over.”
Currently, the outbreak’s effective reproduction number, measuring the average number of other infections that one case created, was estimated to be at around 1.3.
“If it tilts up to 1.4 or 1.5 then we’re talking months at level 3, to bring it down to where interventions can start really taking care of things again.”
Because of that growing risk, Hendy and other experts have been pushing for a temporary jump back to level 4, which they say could stop the outbreak from growing much bigger. The Government has signalled no appetite for such a move.
