The great Covid-19 exodus
It’s always the same. There is a live press conference and announcement about the lockdown at 6.10pm; the Prime Minister tells us to “stay home”.
Aucklanders must have heard, “jump into your cars and drive to the Coromandel Peninsula”. Since 7.10pm, the traffic flow coming past is non-stop, and it will continue deep into the night, as it has been each time with previous lockdown announcements. Why can’t total roadblocks around Auckland be in place before the official announcement is made? Stay at home everyone, or are the rules different for Aucklanders than the rest of the country?
Meike Schmidt, Waitakaruru.
Apology due
Because only 23 per cent of New Zealanders are vaccinated, we are clearly at risk of a Delta outbreak.
The low vaccine rate and poor MIQ system has put us in another preventable lockdown, and lost us the LOTR contact.
Yet no apology or acknowledgement of these failures from the Government — unlike Scott Morrison who some weeks ago apologised to Australia for the slow vaccine rollout?
Janie Weir, Newmarket.
Hard yards
When one awoke this morning, again in lockdown, turned on the news and heard there were four new community cases it made me realise that to get those results so quickly, important people had been burning the midnight oil. It’s just turned 7am and the PM is being interviewed on the radio providing some very up to date information.
Once again those faceless people behind the scenes have heard the call to arms and will do their very best to provide critical information so necessary to prevent the spread of the virus. Whilst frontline workers bear the brunt of outbreaks we should not forget the reliance we have on others who work tirelessly on our behalf.
A big, heartfelt thanks to you all.
Reg Dempster, Albany.
Preparedness lacking
Interesting to hear that the most recent testing of the Devonport wastewater for signs of Covid was on August 11, the day before the most recent case was detected.
Testing of wastewater provides the ability to provide surveillance for hundreds of thousands of people at the same time. Would it not be a good idea to routinely test wastewater on a daily basis or am I missing something?
Vaccine centres are also closed for 48 hours to check that all systems are safe for the vaccinators. Surely, this should have always been a prerequisite?
Randal Lockie, Rothesay Bay.
Without a trace
It’s obviously now time for it to be compulsory for all New Zealanders to use their phones to actively sign in for Covid tracing wherever they go — if not, sign in the old-fashioned pen and paper way everywhere. No sign in — no service, simple. It really should have been like this all along, but precious few have been doing it due to the lack of compulsion and blind complacency. Heck, our supermarket provides handwashing stations prior to entry but I reckon less than 5 per cent use them.
When an event like today’s occurs, how on earth are contact tracers to be able to sort out and prioritise links if next to no one has recorded where they’ve been?
Perry Foreman, Hamilton.
Quick scan
Thames-Coromandel Mayor Sandra Goudie believed her credit card records are better than a QR scan. A simple explanation she might just understand: Delta is so fast that every second counts.
QR records can instantaneously warn others, especially if Bluetooth is on. Getting credit card details is slower, giving Delta time to stay ahead. It also requires a spend in every store visited but surely that is obvious to a 2-year-old. That is why Sydney has no chance of catching Covid. It shows why the economic route will never live with Delta.
One hopes a mayor would be more savvy, more community orientated.
Steve Russell, Hillcrest.
Foraging packs
I am ashamed again by the behaviour of my countrymen, who flock to the supermarkets like animals, with no thought for the rest of us, panicking like animals. Grow up, people.
B Horton, Kohimarama.
Afghanistan failure
The failure in Afghanistan was not just in the past few weeks, it was throughout the 20 years of delusion that any good can come out of a programme of slaughter and destruction. The final days confirmed that delusion in proving that the US and its allies, including New Zealand, had very little knowledge of what they were really dealing with.
We need to rethink what our security is made of, and recognise the need for a solid foundation of relationships that enable us to effectively understand each country that we deal with. I support Gerry Brownlee in engaging with the Taliban, as well as the North Korean and Myanmar governments, and many others that we may not particularly like, to ensure that we can work together on the issues that are really threatening us, like pandemics and climate change.
Gray Southon, Tauranga.
City crime
Drunkenness and violence go often hand in hand. There is an easy solution to make it much better. Close bars and cafes etc. at 11 o’clock so everyone is home by 12.
Liquor stores, close at 6, except on late night shopping they can open till 9. But this is probably too easy to do; things have to be made complicated these days.
D. Hoekstra, Henderson.
Drug law reform
Police commissioner Andrew Coster says, “as long as we have drugs in our community then we will have drug dealers”. Well, we will always have drugs in our community no matter what we do.
A more constructive outlook would be, “as long as gangs can make money selling drugs they will do so, and the income makes gang life attractive”.
If drugs were supplied free to addicts, along with social and mental health support, gangs would make less money. The money saved by addicts might be spent on food and clothing for kids. And no cartel would smuggle drugs to a country where they were free.
Instead of sticking to the failed policies of a 50-year war on drugs, it’s time to try a radical new approach.
Chris Elias, Mission Bay.
There’s $400m
The headline (NZ Herald, August 17) declares: “Auckland councillors worried about $400 million transport funding hole”. The solution to this deficit lies in the hands of our councillors.
A recent independent council payroll study reports possible $400m to $500m annual payroll savings if Auckland Council merely decided to reduce their payroll costs and pay only private-sector-equivalent wages and salaries.
Larry Mitchell, Rothesay Bay.
Whistle stop
The Hamilton to Auckland train is known locally as the “Tokyo Express”.
This is in recognition of the lack of spectators on the platforms; or passengers in the carriages.
Rex Foley, St Andrews.
Pedalling progress
Your columnist Simon Wilson (NZ Herald, August 18) rightly points out that a cycleway is shown in the concept images we released of what Dominion Rd might look like some time in the future if trackless trams are introduced.
However, it is worth noting that there are already two existing cycleways parallel to Dominion Rd, one to the east and one to the west (both built over recent years at a cost of $6m), and the Dominion Rd Business Association is certainly not anti-cycling.
Cycleways may well form part of the future road layout on Dominion Rd but our argument is that trackless trams could enable this to happen far quicker, and at far less cost, than under proposals being pushed by Auckland Light Rail which would involve years of disruption and the potential loss of some of Auckland’s most well-loved eating spots.
We want to ensure that, when mass transit is in place, we still have a Dominion Rd, our World Within a Street, that offers that character and culture for Auckland residents it is known for.
Gary Holmes, manager, Dominion Rd Business Association.
