NATIONAL: 'BOLD' MOVE to leave lockdown
National's Covid-19 spokesman Chris Bishop says the Government's decision to move so swiftly out of alert level 3 is "bold" - but he doesn't have all the information the Government does.
Bishop said the call seemed ambitious given the number of tests still unprocessed and the lack of clarity about how the virus was picked up by an Auckland family.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced the alert level move on Wednesday, ending a snap three-day lockdown instituted after three cases within a family emerged on Sunday.
Ardern said the level 3 decision had been based on the information available on Sunday, and by Wednesday it was clear the country was dealing with a contained outbreak.
Bishop said he was expecting several more days of level 3 given how many questions remained unanswered.
"I was expecting, I think many people were expecting, a couple more days just to get a sense of things. We still don't have any real idea of the source - where it came from.
"Secondly, three new community cases on the same day as the level changes was announced - that struck me as a little bit unusual. And then there's the community testing - there was still over 300 contact tests not processed."
Bishop conceded that he did not have the full range of health advice that the Government did, however.
"We're not privy to the public health advice that the public has seen, but look I think many people would say it's a big call, an ambitious decision, and let's hope it is the right one.
"It's a big call, but Aucklanders will be grateful to be out of lockdown."
Ardern and Director General of Health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said on Wednesday the decision was consistent with advice from the Ministry of Health.
Auckland will stay in level 2 until at least Monday, and the Government has moved to make mask use on public transport mandatory everywhere.
Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins emphasised several times that the new cases that emerged on Wednesday were known contacts of the original family, already in self-isolation, meaning they were not a surprise to the Government.
University of Otago Epidemiologist Dr Amanda Kvalsvig said stepping down alert levels did introduce some risk.
"We have a small group of cases that are strongly linked in terms of being known contacts. That's very positive news. But it is a concern that although onward transmission is being effectively managed, the source is still unknown," Kvalsvig said.
"Despite some reassuring results, stepping down alert levels does introduce risk because there's less protection against unknown transmission from potential earlier missed cases."
