INFLATION SPIKES IN LOCKDOWN Government faces cost-of-living crunch
New Zealanders' cost of living is rising at its fastest quarterly rate since the inflation-plagued 1980s as the Government continues to grapple with supply chain snafus, shortages of goods and labour, and a complicated path to a post- lockdown New Zealand.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced that Auckland would remain in lockdown to combat Covid-19 for at least another two weeks yesterday and signalled that the Government would finally release a vaccine target for the country on Friday.
That target could see restrictions loosened but is unlikely to be reached imminently, as Ardern said it was going to be very high.
Meanwhile, Reserve Bank governor Adrian Orr has overshot the inflation target, as Stats NZ announced its consumer price index grew a hefty 2.3 per cent in the September quarter and 4.9 per cent over the year. It is the biggest quarterly rise since 1987 and the biggest annual rise for a decade.
The Reserve Bank is charged with keeping inflation between 1 per cent and 3 per cent. Most bank economists now predict the central bank's interest rate will rise over the next few Reserve Bank meetings, possibly to as much as 1.5 per cent by mid-2022.
Bank of New Zealand said in a note that the Reserve Bank was "well and truly behind the curve". It also warned that inflation could be far less temporary than some believed.
The Government will review Waikato's level 3 lockdown on Friday.
On the same day, Ardern will also unveil a new traffic light system that will eventually replace the alert level system, and vaccine targets that the country will need to meet before this system is brought in. One target will be set for Auckland, and another will be set for the rest of the country.
"The target will be high, to give us the greatest confidence possible," Ardern said.
"We've looked closely at the evidence from overseas, what works and what doesn't. We'll be aligning our target with those countries that have managed the transition from restrictions to vaccination in the safest way possible."
Director-General of Health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said he did not expect Auckland to reach 90 per cent double dosed for about another month.
The Dominion Post understands a "green light" under the new system would mean almost no restrictions on travel, gatherings and businesses. At orange, masks would be required and capacity limits would kick in for venues. At red, private gatherings would be limited and inter- regional travel restricted.
Ardern and Bloomfield hit back at those calling for a so- called level 4 "circuit breaker" in Auckland, claiming that there was not enough evidence that further lockdowns would bring Covid-19 under control.
"This increase of restrictions would not necessarily reduce cases significantly more than the level 3 restrictions we already have," Ardern said.
The Government is also expected to make the first announcement on how it might change its border settings this week. Very few Covid-positive cases are coming through the border.
ANALYSIS
PAGES 2-3
BUSINESS PAGE 12
