PAUSES GIVE ASSURANCE
Coronavirus is surging through Europe in a second wave that will likely claim thousands of lives.
We approach a hard-earned summer in our largely Covid-free islands nervous about another cluster sending us back into lockdown. Wherever you are in the world, one thing remains unchanged since January - none of us is truly safe from Covid-19 until we receive an effective vaccine.
So you can be forgiven for your dismay at last week's news that a second major Covid-19 vaccine trial had been paused because a trial participant suffered a serious adverse reaction. Pharmaceutical giant Johnson & Johnson followed its rival AstraZeneca in suspending its trial while independent reviews could be undertaken.
Another drugmaker, Eli Lilly, also paused a trial of a drug similar to that which President Trump claims was responsible for his speedy recovery from coronavirus. These are setbacks. But they are also part and parcel of vaccine and drug development.
With around 300,000 people taking part in Covid-19 trials around the world, two serious adverse reactions aren't out of the ordinary. Vaccine makers have been moving at a blistering pace in progressing through clinical trials. These pauses show that, despite the haste, proper safety procedures are being followed. That should give millions of people the confidence to receive a vaccine when one is actually ready for use.
"We're going to have to get used to hearing these sorts of reports of pauses in vaccine trials," Hassan Vally, an associate professor in epidemiology at La Trobe University in Melbourne, pointed out last week. "The only difference is that in the world that we live in right now, the progress of these trials are in the public eye, and so we are riding every bump."
With AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson considered two of the frontrunners in the race for a vaccine, hundreds of scientists are now scrambling to determine whether they've just hit a bump or a trip-ending washout.
Did the vaccine cause the illness in the trial participants or was it just coincidence? If it's the vaccine, which part of it is responsible and can it be re-engineered?
The good news is that with trials of 49 vaccine candidates under way around the world and some targeting the virus in quite different ways, we have greatly reduced the risk of the whole vaccine effort coming up short.
Past experience suggests most won't succeed, but we only need a handful that can be produced in large quantities. In the meantime, we continue with what San Francisco writer Tomas Pueyo calls the "hammer and the dance".
We hammered Covid during lockdown. Now we must carefully dance around each other to make sure it doesn't take hold until we are all vaccinated.
