Tough call looms on lockdown
The Government will face one of its toughest decisions yet when it meets tomorrow to decide whether Auckland should drop to level 3 restrictions, Covid commentators say.
Business and public pressure is mounting on the Government to ease lockdown restrictions, despite yesterday’s 20 new Covid-19 cases in the community.
The Ministry of Health said case numbers were expected to fluctuate at this point in the pandemic, and only one of the new cases is unlinked as Aucklanders cling to hope for an alert level change this week.
Nineteen of yesterday’s new cases are household or known contacts.
Yesterday’s sunshine brought Aucklanders back to the city’s beaches — and a police warning against breaching restrictions.
A police spokesman confirmed two people made it to Taupo after crossing Auckland’s southern border checkpoints allegedly using false documents on Friday. The pair were arrested and would appear in court. They have since returned to Auckland.
It comes after three Auckland essential workers were arrested in Ōhakune during the week after travelling to Turoa ski field.
The trio will appear in the Auckland District Court on September 23.
And yesterday, four Ōtāhuhu residents were given Covid infringements after being seen fishing at Mission Bay.
In Tāmaki Makaurau, 78 people had been charged with a total of 82 offences related to lockdown breaches as at 5pm yesterday.
Cabinet ministers will tomorrow be forced to balance the risk of further transmission against economic pressures and concerns residents are getting “lockdown fatigue”, the experts say.
One of the key risks is whether level 3 will prove able to stamp out Covid cases.
If it doesn’t, Auckland could be forced back into level 4 later or — in a worst case scenario where cases escalate like in New South Wales — be kept under restrictions for months until enough people are vaccinated.
Another key to tomorrow’s decision will be how many cases of concern are not yet linked back to people known to have the virus, and whether this means Covid is transmitting without detection.
“It’s really hard to say this time around,” University of Auckland professor in public health Dr Collin Tukuitonga said yesterday.
“The heat is on the Government from a business and economic viewpoint but at the same time we’ve still got 20 new cases today.”
University of Auckland Professor Shaun Hendy agreed.
“You could persist at level 4 and stamp this out,” he earlier said. “On the other hand, everybody’s a bit over level 4, people need a bit of light at the end of the tunnel. It’s probably worth taking a calculated risk.”
Director of public health Dr Caroline McElnay said there was “cautious optimism” the vast majority of the outbreak had been contained. Despite her assurances, it remained unclear to most members of the public where recent unlinked cases have been getting the virus from.
Experts spoken to by the Herald said it wasn’t clear from the information released if people were venturing out when they should be isolating.
However, health teams would know and be passing it on to Cabinet to weigh up when making tomorrow’s decision, Tukuitonga said.
Otago University Professor Michael Baker said Covid could be spreading through essential workers, people shopping or those “detached from or bending the rules”.
University of Auckland Associate Professor Siouxsie Wiles said lockdown had been working and the falling cases was an achievement.
