UNCERTAINTY WITH POSITIVITY
When history arrives there is no such thing as little people. A bus driver, a mother, a potter and a schoolboy: In a weekly series Joel Maxwell follows the thoughts, loves, fears and challenges of these four Wellington people through the coronavirus lockdown.
--------------------
Driving through Wellington's empty streets, bus driver Tigger Wells was struck by the magnitude of the change.
The lockdown was like some bizarre experiment. Maybe simply stepping back and observing was one way to maintain sanity. Bizarre things could happen, predictable things, inexplicable things, wonderful things, immensely sad things. Wells, 55, a transgender person, a life fulfilment coach, and a bus driver, decided to start a wave of positivity through the others still allowed on the streets. Wells waved, gave a thumbs-up, to every single person he passed. It would have been laughable, through sheer numbers, days earlier.
In the final days before the lockdown Anneke Borren, 73, was allowed a quick visit to her pottery studio to grab 50 kilograms of porcelain primo clay. Her wheel is out of bounds now but she still has her fingers. Borren wanted to make clay whistles - 10 a day, hopefully - for the duration. Borren drove her campervan to her niece's home in Paremata. It was a gnarly trip to get the vehicle up the driveway but she was just glad to have somewhere to park. It was familiar here too. Down below she could see the boatshed where she lived for a year after her divorce. Her old house was nearby. She could walk the old paths again. Eight per day, she discovered, was a more realistic tally for the ornately patterned whistles.
Borren is fatalistic about life and death. It is comforting to think her pieces will last a hell of a lot longer than she will. She is glad she created them for the world, and that they are beautiful, and that other people enjoy that beauty, whether they are a baby holding a pot 25 years in the future or someone holding it now.
Right now, Antionette Tafeamaalii, 30, is not taking any chances about the future. She has rheumatoid arthritis and, with medicine suppressing her immune system, she closed her cosmetic tattooing and beauty business when alert level 2 arrived; before lockdown with her 18-month-old son, Jackson, and partner Peter Younger in Waikanae on the Kapiti Coast. Younger has taken over her beauty room now and uses her massage table as his work desk.
Even though Jackson is not even 2, he senses something serious is happening around him.
It is corny, Tafeamaalii thinks, but she is taking pictures of her son every day during the lockdown and is making him a pandemic photo album. He is living through history. The scary part, she told Peter, was that by the time Jackson was 20, he might have already lived through a couple of pandemics.
Recording history for Zephaniah Joe, 12, started on Friday, March 20, when he sat down and started writing a diary of his life after the arrival of Covid-19.
School camp has finished, Dad picks me up and tells me the virus has gotten worse. How can so much change? It has only been a week. People are talking about a lockdown. What does that mean? Things feel so uncertain.
Now Zeph goes for a run every day in the countryside near Otaki, at the very north of the Kapiti Coast. At midday, he and his family go for a walk around the big paddock on their property.
In the past weeks he discovered he would not be going to school, the upcoming rugby season would be cancelled, and there would not be any services at the Otaki Baptist Church. It is to protect the older members of the congregation, Zeph knows, but, still, it is weird not going to church on Sundays.
Anyway, life in lockdown has been passing quite quickly. You do not feel isolated in the country - it is not like being stuck alone in an apartment building in the middle of the city.
Back in the city: the reactions that Wells got on the near-empty streets, as the waving bus driver, filled his heart with positivity.
In 2010, Wells came to New Zealand from Britain, leaving behind parents, both in their 80s, in a village in Oxfordshire.
Wells was planning to visit them in August. He may never see them again.
They are anxious about him and Wells is anxious about them but as long as the internet holds up, their video calls are a reassuring connection.
