TRUST ALONE NO LONGER ENOUGH
Up until now, New Zealand has relied on cooperation rather than coercion for compliance with Covid-19 public health measures. But the latest lockdown, which was prompted by additional community cases in South Auckland stemming from contacts by someone who was supposed to be self-isolating while waiting for Covid-19 test results, led National to call for fines for rule-breakers.
Even the public face of the Government's high- trust approach to Covid-19, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, said she was "in two minds" on the question of fining rule-breakers.
"I absolutely see that people want repercussions." On the other hand, "How do we make sure that people tell us their truth? Because there is nothing more valuable to us than knowing contact has occurred," Ardern said. In other words, if people fear their answers to contact tracing questions might result in their being fined, then they won't tell the truth. Yesterday she went so far as to call on people to intervene when they saw rule-breaking and that, as for consequences, rule-breakers were "facing the judgment of the entire nation".
The key consideration here is the outcome desired and the behaviour change needed to reach it. Forget the public instinct for repercussions or punishment, which tend to come in response to anger or frustration that others have to pay the price for an individual's lack of responsibility in complying.
With Aucklanders enduring another seven days of lockdown, at a daily cost to the regional economy of $30 million, it is all too tempting to seek a scapegoat. Assuaging that instinct might result in a sugar hit of political popularity but would likely lead to worse outcomes. The desired outcome is for people to describe their contacts and movements in full and frank detail.
The Government's communications strategy around Covid-19 has been rightly hailed as a great example of team-building and trust. But with several examples now of people not reciprocating the trust shown in them to do the right thing around full contact disclosure and self-isolation, is it time to move to a "trust but verify" approach? This is the middle ground staked out by ACT leader David Seymour, who supports using digital technology to track people who are meant to be isolating, as Taiwan has done.
Verifying compliance undercuts trust but is appropriate when verifying the outcome is more important than preserving the relationship. In this case, the stakes of the outcome could not be higher.
It seems clear that the trust relationship between health authorities and the South Auckland community has been eroded on both sides and a call for responses ranging from fines for rule-breakers to electronic monitoring such as tracking cellphones will further damage that trust. That is why any such moves should be paired with a full-court press of community engagement, in partnership with community leaders and in the full range of languages represented in the community. Trust alone is no longer tenable given the damage inflicted by even one or two careless or wilful missteps by infectious people.
The message must be that extra vigilance, and even monitoring, are in the best interests of the community itself, which is more vulnerable to Covid-19 infections than other communities. For some, such measures will look like government over-reach or patronising but the key word is care. It's just that in this case, care and monitoring compliance may look very similar.
