MIT student leader urges ‘give South Aucklanda break’
A Manukau student leader has made a heartfelt plea to New Zealanders to stop criticising South Auckland over the latest Covid-19 outbreak.
Micah Sili, student council president at Manukau Institute of Technology (MIT), asked for “a little empathy” for South Auckland and for the MIT student whose positive Covid-19 test plunged Auckland into this week’s level-3 lockdown.
Her comments came as Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said two South Auckland families that did not initially disclose that they had contact with each other during the last level-3 lockdown two weeks ago were “facing the judgment of the entire nation”.
Sili said she had been “noticing some comments coming towards South Auckland”, including many blaming the MIT digital technologies student who went to a gym after having a Covid test on Friday instead of self-isolating at home.
“I just want to message out there to practise one of our values, which is manaakitanga — to respect each other,” she said.
“Forget your frustration. We understand it. But a little empathy goes a long way.
“We are a family of five million doing this, but at the moment South Auckland is spearheading this battle, so we are just asking for a little more support to our community.”
MIT’s 14,000 students reflect South Auckland’s extraordinary ethnic diversity. In 2019, 32 per cent were of Pacific ethnicity, 30 per cent Asian, 27 per cent European, 16 per cent Māori and 7 per cent other ethnicities. Many listed more than one ethnicity.
More than half (52 per cent) of its domestic students were mature adults aged 25 or over, and 41 per cent studied only part-time.
Sili, a nursing student who studies in the same building as the digital technologies student above the Manukau railway station, said students’ anxiety about Covid was worsened when the Ministry of Health initially posted the wrong address and some incorrect dates when the MIT case was first reported on Saturday night.
“That was corrected [on Sunday], but it did tend to add to students’ anxiety,” she said.
Some students are angry that the digital technologies student did not self-isolate after his Covid test. Tony Creighton, a former printer who is retraining in his 50s as a builder, said people were already unhappy with the first lockdown two weeks ago before the MIT case arose.
“What’s happened with this person — my feeling is he wouldn’t want his name to come out because there is a lot of pressure over the way it has come about,” he said.
An electrical student, who asked to be anonymous, said he was disappointed with the way MIT had handled risks, allowing about 150 trades academy students from Auckland high schools including Papatoetoe High School to wait in a confined space to be registered on the first day of their courses last Monday, February 22, when Auckland was under alert level 2 restrictions.
“It was just so jam-packed in there that we didn’t even bother walking into class because we all knew the numbers exceeded the numbers allowed,” he said.
Business student Lovepreet Singh, an Indian student who represents international students on the student council, said many students panicked on Saturday night and wondered whether they should get Covid tests.
“I myself called the Ministry of Health [on Sunday] because I live with my close family,” he said.
“They were like, there is no need for me, because I am just a casual contact.”
But education lecturer Angela Yerkovich, co-president of MIT’s branch of the Tertiary Education Union, got a Covid test at Takanini on Sunday even though she is also only a “casual contact”, working in the same building as the digital technologies student but in a different department.
“My family are concerned because they know I work there,” she said.
