‘It all feels hard right now — but we’re going to be okay’
Ardern has reassuring words as lockdown-weary Aucklanders face fresh freedoms despite rising Covid cases
Fatigued Aucklanders who have endured 11 weeks of lockdown look likely to be given new freedoms next week despite the number of community Covid-19 cases tipped to peak later this month.
The in-principle move to ease restrictions has drawn cautious support from some experts, as evidence builds that vaccination levels are helping reduce the need for hospital and intensive care.
“Despite how hard everything feels right now, we are going to be okay,” Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern told the country yesterday.
However, others warn that giving people more freedom could still lead to a dramatic rise in cases, and risk overwhelming the health system with desperately sick and dying patients.
Yesterday a record number of daily cases — 162 — were reported, taking the overall number in the outbreak to 3510.
Five were in Waikato, one in Northland and the rest in Auckland.
Despite this, Ardern announced Waikato would move to step 2 of level 3 restrictions from 11.59pm tonight, and Auckland — in principle — a week later.
This step would allow retail stores to operate with safe distancing requirements and mask use, public facilities like libraries and museums to reopen, and outdoor gatherings to increase to 25 from 10.
Epidemiologist Dr Michael Baker said the move was a “reasonable balance”, with the risk of high school students returning this week yet to be known alongside increasing evidence the vaccine was working.
As of yesterday, 53 people were in hospital with Covid-19, three of them in intensive care.
These numbers have remained relatively steady since the outbreak began, despite a dramatic rise in daily case numbers.
This has also accompanied an increasing proportion of those infected being vaccinated, reflecting the overall growing vaccination rates.
As of yesterday, just over 75 per cent of the eligible population — aged over 12 — had had two doses of the Pfizer vaccine, and just over 88 per cent had received at least one dose.
Of those infected in this outbreak, the proportion without a single dose has dropped from 82 per cent on September 9 to 72 per cent.
Meanwhile the hospitalisation rate of all cases has dropped from 9.7 per cent to 7.4 per cent over the same period.
“We are seeing the double benefits of vaccination,” Baker said.
“Case numbers are being kept down, along with contact tracing and the alert level system, while hospital rates are also decreasing.”
Ardern said behind the Waikato decision was the fact that all cases were linked, and that there were increasingly high vaccination rates.
For Auckland, she said the move to step 2 next week would remove “some of the pressure and fatigue that we know exists in Auckland”.
Ardern said there were now more tools than there had been when the pandemic started.
High vaccination levels gave the Government the ability to ease restrictions safely and carefully, she said.
The growth in cases was not unexpected, but hospitalisations were “very manageable” and that was the impact vaccinations were having.
Before the announcement, director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield revealed the latest modelling projections on Covid-19 case numbers and hospitalisations, and how they were being affected by restrictions and vaccination rates.
It showed that in three weeks’ time, vaccination coverage in Auckland could be high enough to keep the outbreak from growing any more, with the number of daily cases peaking at about 200 a day.
By the end of November, 150 people a week would need hospital care, 11 of whom would need intensive care (ICU), and Covid-19 patients would take up 106 hospital beds, including 20 ICU beds.
The current hospital capacity should be able to cope with this, with most of the active cases in home isolation.
Bloomfield said current and projected statistics reflected the fact more people were being vaccinated, and that those who were vaccinated and infected were less likely to need hospital care.
That current rate could be even lower, Bloomfield said, because many of those in hospital were there for other illnesses.
However, he said the young median age in the outbreak, 30, was also likely playing a role.
This indicated the alert levels, keeping most vulnerable people at home, was working, along with much higher vaccination rates among older prioritised groups.
Microbiologist Dr Siouxsie Wiles said she was “nervous” about the alert level shift, with the full impact of senior students returning to school on transmission yet to be seen.
“Cases are still rising, and while we are being reassured that this is not going to overwhelm our health system, we need to remember that Covid-19 is a serious disease and many unvaccinated people who catch the virus will develop long Covid,” she said.
Covid modeller Professor Michael Plank said while vaccination weakened the link between cases, hospitalisations and deaths, it didn’t remove it altogether.
There also needed to be a greater focus on equity, he said.
“Māori now account for 40-50 per cent of cases in the current outbreak and will bear the brunt of any increase in community transmission.”
National Party leader Judith Collins said the announcement raised more questions than answers, and she asked why vaccine certificates were not being used yet.
“If they were ready now, vaccinated Aucklanders could have much greater freedom and could even leave the Auckland prison.
“The fact [the certificates] are not ready is a disgrace and emblematic of a Government that simply hasn’t done the work.”
The leader of the Act party, David Seymour, said with Auckland having the highest vaccination rates in the country it should move to alert level 3 step 2 today.
“Aucklanders also have the greatest need, with businesses going under, the mood depressed, and people increasingly desperate after three months of lockdown.”
Meanwhile Auckland mayor Phil Goff said the move balanced containing the virus spread while maintaining public compliance and the impact of lockdowns on jobs, businesses and overall wellbeing. By next Tuesday, over 90 per cent of eligible people in all Auckland’s district health boards would likely have had their first vaccination, with over 80 per cent fully vaccinated, he said.
