Lockdown not lockout: property sales boom
The recent construction shutdown resulting from Auckland’s Covid-19 lockdown has put additional pressure on an industrial property market already struggling to keep pace with demand.
Scott Campbell, Bayleys’ national director of industrial and logistics, says Bayleys has had one of its busiest six months ever, particularly at the higher value end of the market, negotiating over 30 industrial sales in excess of $5 million since April 1.
However, he says the latest Level 4 lockdown has further exacerbated the shortage of properties available for purchase or lease.
“Lockdowns last year slowed the development of new industrial premises and land subdivisions considerably. We hadn’t really caught up on the supply side when construction was halted in Auckland for another five weeks from mid-August until last week.
“This has increased the already high level of pent-up demand for industrial property which is coming from all quarters – investors, business owner-occupiers, tenants and developers.”
Sunil Bhana, Bayleys’ Auckland industrial sales and leasing director, says a limited supply of new properties coming onto the market are being rapidly snapped up, often before construction has been completed.
A recent example is a warehouse complex nearing completion close to Auckland airport at 29 Sistema Way, Mangere. Located on a 4314sq m site, the 4054sq m clear span warehouse with 1171sq m drive-through canopy and 260sq m of offices was purchased vacant by an investor for $18.25 million.
“Investors have so much confidence in the industrial property market that they are comfortable about buying a building that is under construction without tenant commitment, given Auckland’s record lowindustrial vacancy rate which is currently sitting at a miniscule 1.5 per cent,” says Bhana, who was involved in the Sistema Way sale with colleagues James Valintin, James Hill, Scott Campbell and Tim Bull.
Bayleys South Auckland office has also negotiated the leasing and subsequent sale while under construction of three properties on adjoining lots in a 12-lotindustrial subdivision at 72-88 Tidal Rd, Mangere, at a total value of $116.8 million. These were sold with 12-year leases from building completion.
The largest transaction was the $48.8 million sale to Centuria NZ (formerly Augusta) of a 15,000sq m complex on a 4.9ha site to be occupied mostly by Hancocks Wine, Spirit and Beer Merchants as their national distribution facility and head office.
The property was acquired as part of the Centuria NZ Industrial Fund’s third capital raise marketed by Bayleys’ Syndication and Investment Products division.
The other two sales encompassed a 13,700sq m warehouse and office building on a 1.8ha site, occupied by logistics provider Supply Chain Solutions, which was sold for $43.5 million, and an 8700sq mindustrial facility on a 1.25ha site, leased to another logistics company, which received 14 offers and sold for $24.5 million.
Further south, work has also commenced this year on the first industrial buildings to be constructed in the 361ha Drury South Crossing project. Campbell says building activity is expected to pick up rapidly over the next few years with the uptake of sites running ahead of expectations.
Bayleys North Shore director Matt Mimmack says good quality properties with underlying zonings that allow for more intensive development are selling at historically low yields.
— Article supplied by Bayleys
