WHEN ALL ELSE FAILS YOU MIGHT AS WELL TRY DOING THE RIGHT THING
There are a lot of people today who look back at those early days of the first lockdown with a certain fondness. I am not one of them.
For many of these people the first Covid-19 lockdown was New Zealand at its best: we were getting the homeless housed, driving less, walking more, spending time with family, following the science, putting teddy bears in windows, and ramping up for a "build back better" construction drive like a cleaner, greener, Michael Joseph Savage.
I remember things a little differently. Mostly, I remember being sent a Microsoft Word document that was a jumbled mess of names and phone numbers.
They were all migrants out of work - some were employed in industries like hospitality and tourism, others worked for employers who had decided to shore up their balance sheets by firing staff who had nowhere to go and no social safety net to fall back on.
Some migrant workers lined up for food parcels, dished out by a First-World nation which wanted to make sure the migrants who made them flat whites and cleaned their offices knew assistance during a pandemic was at their own pleasure.
For their trouble, these migrants were given cans of beans, sometimes just two cans for the entirety of lockdown, delivered by the Red Cross or civil defence, as if New Zealand was a Third-World country whose infrastructure had just been taken out by a hurricane, rather than a developed nation with a healthy cluster of supermarkets just down the road.
Most migrants kept their jobs, but were still uneasy, and wondered if they would be able to stay. As a press gallery reporter at the time, I put the question to a senior government official. As I remember it, he replied "look, to be honest, I'm just more concerned about New Zealanders".
Well, to be fair to him, I guess that was the answer.
Migrants seeking residency have to file expressions of interest (EOIs) if they think they meet the points required. During the first lockdown, the Government also hit pause on selecting any of these applications, but people kept sending them in. There was no word on whether the selection process would ever open again.
Even if the EOI process restarted again, what would be the point? People who made it through the EOI queue would just be stuck in a residency queue that had been backed up for years.
Perhaps there was hope, maybe the lockdown and the paused EOI selections could be an opportunity for stressed Immigration NZ case officers to make some headway through this backlog?
Not so fast. Residency applications are paper-based, and cannot be taken off-site.
A former Immigration NZ employee told me the department's printer has been clogged up every lockdown, thanks to the frantic bout of document-scanning that normally follows an alert level announcement. All of it in vain, because in the end, not enough officers are able to actually use these scanned documents.
The issue seems to be a technical one. Some say it is the department's outdated IT software, others say it is due to a lack of laptops.
It is hard to believe a government department would still be short of laptops this far into a pandemic, but it is surely telling that whatever the problem is, it is so low on everybody's radar that it hasn't been worth anybody's while fixing it.
Then there were the thousands of migrants on work visas, all set to renew every year.
In normal times this wouldn't be a problem, skills shortages would persist and the agencies involved would continue to approve these visas, sometimes for a decade or more. But would the visa renewals keep coming?
Some discovered they wouldn't. After lockdown lifted, they had to go through new labour market tests and jump through all sorts of hoops.
Not a lot of employers were willing to jump through these hoops, especially with the expected future inflow of New Zealanders (most businesses would rather hire a local than a foreigner).
Ministerial and governmental hands have been pulling the noose tighter on migrants since even before the pandemic.
Someone once told me immigration is really badly handled in every country. This is probably true. There is delay, inconsistency, and unfairness everywhere, but often this comes upfront, from countries who do not pretend to be kinder, gentler, and friendlier than the rest.
Some of these unkind nations have been changing their tune in recent years. Migration-averse Japan has surprised everyone, including migrants themselves, by ramping up temporary migration, and providing pathways to citizenship and residency for workers they now believe essential. During the pandemic, Japan even supported migrant workers with income support payments (something New Zealand didn't do until we thought the worst of the pandemic was over).
So, what happened to change all of this? Over the past year migrant workers have found their voice. They have coalesced around some key leaders, tried to influence policy through think tanks, and increasingly put themselves out there in front of the media. Luckily, this has come at the time of some uncharacteristically smart politicking, and campaigning, from the Opposition too.
All of this led to the historic reversal this week. It is only a few months ago that the Government announced an immigration reset. This week it has announced a residence pathway that theoretically could provide residency to a florist, cook, or nut- picker who earns less than the median wage and has been in the country for less than three years.
Had the Government planned to do this all along? Or is such a radical reversal all thanks to the stepped-up advocacy of migrant groups?
The truth is probably closer to self-interest. Most industries have discovered that going "cold turkey" on migration just isn't as easy as it sounds.
These days it is impossible to open up a newspaper without reading about one business, or another, campaigning for a border exemption of some kind.
Against this backdrop, the act of punishing people who have already made it through the border has begun to look increasingly ridiculous.
Sometimes, doing the right thing is just easier than the alternative.
