WHO: Easing restrictions early a ‘recipe for disaster’
The World Health Organisation has issued a stark warning about easing Covid-19 restrictions too early as many countries are dealing with deadly second waves of the virus.
WHO director-general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he understood people were tired of being in lockdown, but warned rushing to open the economy was a “recipe for disaster” if coronavirus transmission wasn’t under control.
“WHO fully supports efforts to re-open economies and societies.
“We want to see children returning to school and people returning to the workplace — but we want to see it done safely,” Tedros said during a media briefing yesterday.
“At the same time, no country can just pretend the pandemic is over. The reality is that this coronavirus spreads easily, it can be fatal to people of all ages, and most people remain susceptible.
“The more control countries have over the virus, the more they can open up.
“Opening up without having control is a recipe for disaster. It’s not one size fits all, it’s not all or nothing.”
Essential steps to reopening Tedros outlined the four essential things communities must focus on if they want to control the virus enough to start easing restrictions.
The first is to prevent large gatherings, with “explosive outbreaks” across the world linked to crowds at stadiums, nightclubs, places of worship and many other settings.
The WHO director-general said there are some ways to hold large gatherings safely but the most effective way to reduce significant community transmission is to postpone these types of events.
The second step to reopening the community is to reduce the death rate by giving more protection to vulnerable groups, such as the elderly, people with underlying health conditions and essential workers.
“By protecting those who are most at risk, countries can save lives, prevent people becoming severely ill, and take the pressure off their health systems,” Dr Tedros said.
The third essential move is to ensure individuals comply with safety measures such as social distancing, washing their hands and wearing a mask.
Individuals are also urged to avoid the “three Cs”: closed spaces, crowded places and close-contact settings.
The fourth factor in safely easing restrictions is for governments to have a clear plan of action on how to find, isolate, test and care for Covid-19 cases, while also quickly tracing and quarantining close contacts.
“Widespread stay-at-home orders can be avoided if countries take temporary and geographically-targeted interventions,” Tedros said.
—news.com.au
