POLICE TIPPED TO HUNDREDS OF BREACHES
Police received 684 reports of breaches of level 4 rules in the first 17 hours of the nationwide Covid-19 lockdown and seven people have been charged.
Police Commissioner Andrew Coster said yesterday that reporting numbers and observations from officers across the country showed the "vast majority" of people were abiding by the rules.
Police received 684 notifications from when online reporting of breaches began, at midnight on Tuesday, and 5pm on Wednesday.
Of those reports, 322 were about a gathering, 320 about a business and 42 about an individual.
About a third of the reports were from Auckland.
Police would assess every notification received and follow up where required, Coster said.
"Police will be taking an education-first approach around the new requirement to wear a face-covering at essential services such as supermarkets and pharmacies." Enforcement action would be taken where necessary.
"People should know what the rules are by now, and why it is so important to follow them, particularly when it comes to unlawful gatherings and repeated breaches of restrictions. Those in breach put the safety of all New Zealanders at risk, and they can expect that police will act early and quickly to enforce compliance."
Yesterday afternoon, officers in Christchurch arrested three people allegedly involved in an anti-lockdown protest. Ten people had gathered by the Bridge of Remembrance in Cashel St about 1pm. Police encouraged the protesters to comply with alert level 4 restrictions and arrested three when they refused to do so, police said. Two men, aged 46 and 50, and a woman, aged 56, were charged with failing to comply with a direction/prohibition/restriction (Covid-19) and were to appear in the Christchurch District Court today.
The protest followed a similar gathering on Wednesday at the same location when two people were issued warnings.
Two men, aged 49 and 36, were due to appear in Auckland District Court yesterday after a protest in Auckland on Wednesday. They each faced two charges under the Covid-19 Public Health Response Act, and one charge under the Search and Surveillance Act. A 52-year-old woman who was also arrested was due to appear in the Auckland District Court next Wednesday.
Of the four people arrested during protest activity in Tauranga on Wednesday, three were issued with formal warnings. A 56-year-old woman was due to appear in Tauranga District Court on Monday on one charge under the Health Act.
Two people - a 44-year-old man and 23-year-old woman - were also arrested for refusing to wear face coverings at Pak 'n Save Kaitaia, in the Far North.
Coster said they were arrested for disorderly behaviour and breaching the Public Health Response Act yesterday. Police did not say if they had been charged.
Eight people have been warned so far on the West Coast for breaching lockdown rules. Senior Sergeant Mark Kirkwood said most of them were in Greymouth, and they were warned for walking around and congregating after midnight when lockdown came into force.
Police have been carrying out "high visibility patrols" at supermarkets and other essential businesses to provide reassurance and assist with managing crowds where required. "We will have a visible presence across our towns, cities, and on the roads to ensure people are keeping to the restrictions and that people who are travelling are doing so for essential and approved purposes," Coster said.
Police staff across New Zealand have been instructed to wear face coverings and appropriate personal protective equipment at all times when deployed and within police sites.
Most police stations are closed to the public during alert level 4 and people are asked to communicate with police online where possible.
