LIMIT ON VISITOR NUMBERS PROPOSED in aftermath of coronavirus
As the country grapples with the effects of Covid-19 on tourism post- lockdown, there are calls for a serious rethink of how the industry operates, including a cap on numbers.
Canterbury Aoraki Conservation Board member Dr Robert Wynn-Williams has proposed a cap on future visitor numbers - his proposal will be discussed at the board's next teleconference meeting on Wednesday.
Wynn-Williams, a former acting chairman of the board, said the time was right to discuss the future of tourism in New Zealand, given that the lockdown meant "tourism is currently at zero". "There's going to be a lot of pain in the tourism industry even after the lockdown lifts. We just don't know what tourism will look like in the future," he said.
Conservation Boards are independent bodies that provide a voice for local concerns to gain traction in Department of Conservation work, and on a national level where required.
Wynn-Williams said he was not sure how the capping mechanisms could operate, although he believed there were lessons to learn from countries such as Bhutan, which take a "high-value, low-impact" approach to tourism that could potentially place less pressure on the environment if adopted here.
"I think with the current climate, it is a really opportune time to discuss this," he said.
In the 12-month period ended January 31, 2019, Aoraki/Mt Cook National Park recorded more than a million visitors. The figures for the 12-month period ended January 31, 2020, are yet to be released.
Wynn-Williams said he would like to see the pressure taken off places such as Aoraki/Mt Cook National Park in the future.
"We've got to look at how much they can actually sustain," he said.
Federated Mountain Clubs president Jan Finlayson agreed there needed to be a rethink of how the tourism industry would work post-Covid-19.
The organisation, which has more than 22,000 members, had already approached the Tourism Minister Kelvin Davis about its concerns, including how future tourism infrastructure would be developed.
"We are fully supportive of the concept of ramped-up recreational, infrastructural work on public conservation land and other such land as part of post-Covid recovery," Finlayson said.
"Done well, it will benefit health and nationhood, as well as the economy."
The Government said earlier this month that it had put Tourism New Zealand in charge of leading work to reimagine the way tourism operates in post-Covid-19 world.
