RISE IN FAMILY VIOLENCE LIKELY AGAIN
A spike in family violence during last year's Covid-19 lockdown has agencies urging people to act on any concerns about those isolated with their abuser during New Zealand's latest lockdown.
Social work agencies are preparing for a likely increase in need after 654 reports of family violence were made to police the day after the 2020 lockdown announcement - a record second only to the notoriously violent New Year's Day.
During level 4 to level 2, the number of family harm incidents reported ranged from 345 to 645 a day, compared to between 271 and 478 in the same period in 2019.
Police sources say they expect a similar trend this time around.
Women's Rights Commissioner Saunoamaali'i Karanina Sumeo urged people to contact those known to be struggling, including those who are elderly or disabled and even less able to leave. "Now is not a good time to leave them alone. Closing our eyes and ears is not a way to move forward for our team of five million."
Holly Carrington, a spokeswoman for domestic abuse charity Shine, told Stuff cases of more serious violence - people at risk of being killed - and extreme acts of control were consistent after the 2020 lockdown.
In some instances, women were "physically tortured" by their partners. Others were deprived of necessities.
Carrington expected similar incidents from this lockdown "because once again people experiencing abuse are going to be stuck at home with the person abusing them with very few options to get away or get help".
"We've been prepared for it.
"If you hear something that sounds like somebody being assaulted or threatened, or looks or sounds like imminent danger to somebody, just ring 111."
If it was not safe to talk at home, victims could also ring 111, then push 55 - police would then understand silence to mean an alert.
There was also help for anyone worried about their own behaviour, such as helplines like 0800 HEYBRO.
Many other services could also be contacted silently, like the chat service on the Shine website, and the Women's Refuge's shielded site.
Womens Refuge chief executive Ang Jury said its 40 affiliated and dozen non-affiliated refuges remained open, although with social distancing.
As with the last lockdown, she worried about barriers to seeking help.
She warned concerned whanau: "Don't ignore it or think it'll be OK because it might not be.
"It's very hard to make a phone call when the person you're calling about is in the house."
The Women's Refuge shielded site was shown to be valuable, with one woman even using it to get help while in managed isolation, she said.
Eclipse Family Violence Services director Debbs Murray said lockdown established another layer of entrapment for victims "who have already lost the ability to exist freely in their own worlds".
Level 4 restrictions created "almost the perfect storm of circumstances", including extreme physical isolation with volatile aggressors and vulnerable victims - and closed doors.
She suggested creating a safety strategy with anyone at increased risk by planning a text message or emoji a victim could send as an alert and staying connected - always assuming the abusive person was present and listening or reading text messages.
