Cops send families home from the snow
Police called to Sth Is tourist spot to deal with snowboarders ignoring lockdown
Police were called to a popular tourist spot near Queenstown at least twice yesterday to send home Covid-19 lockdown-flouting snow-seekers.
The Herald was there just after midday when police arrived at the Crown Range Rd summit where a number of people were gathered.
Some were snowboarding, others sledding or playing in the snow.
Others were walking dogs.
The area is a 45-minute drive from Queenstown.
It is understood police were also called to the area yesterday morning to send an earlier group home.
At midday there were six cars in the parking area.
Given the area is so far from Queenstown, it is unlikely authorities would consider it appropriate for people to be there under the current lockdown rules.
Under alert level 4 restrictions all New Zealanders have been instructed to “stay at home in their bubble other than for essential personal movement”.
“Safe recreational activity” is allowed in a person’s local area and travel is severely limited.
All gatherings are banned and all public venues closed.
The message — although blatantly clear and simple — is not getting through to some though.
Yesterday police reiterated they had a low tolerance of unlawful gatherings after several people left home to attend lockdown-related protests around the country.
“And the public can expect that we will look to enforce the current restrictions in place under alert level 4,” a spokesperson said.
“We urge everyone to stay at home and we will continue to work with our partners and the public to ensure everyone complies with the restrictions in place under alert level 4,” the spokesperson said.
“The vast majority of New Zealanders are doing the right thing and abiding by the alert level restrictions, and these protesters represent a very small number of people who are not,” the police spokesperson said.
“People not following the rules and travelling so far from home to partake in leisure activities puts them at risk of accidents and needing emergency services.”
This then takes police, ambulance, fire and hospital staff away from Covid-related duties and puts extra pressure on front-line responders — as well as potentially exposing them to the virus.
On Wednesday officers arrested several people as protesters gathered at three places across the country.
Four were taken into custody in relation to breaching the Health Act notice after a protest outside TVNZ headquarters in Auckland’s CBD on Wednesday afternoon.
A further four people were arrested that morning after an anti-lockdown protest outside the Tauranga Police Station.
Police made a number of attempts to engage with about 20 people gathered outside the station, but four were taken into custody when they repeatedly refused to comply with alert level 4 restrictions.
The third protest on Wednesday was outside Nelson Police Station.
All those present were spoken to and urged to comply with the restrictions in place under alert level 4.
Police said about 20 people were given a verbal warning and were moved on. —Additional reporting
George Heard
