Growth industry: Hawke’s Bay garden centre business up for grabs
One of the oldest Hawke’s Bay sites for garden supplies - which has blossomed as a result of Kiwis’ changing societal habits since Covid-19 lockdown restrictions were eased in the middle of last year - has been placed on the market for sale.
The Garden Depot Hastings has been retailing trees, palms, shrubs, and flowers, along with a full selection of pots, soil mixes, fertilisers, seeds, and gardening equipment under various brands for more than 50-years.
The location first traded as Wilson Nursery in the 1960s, before being bought by the Whittaker family and renamed Whittakers Garden Centre, which sold out in the 1990s to branded garden centre operator Palmers. Mitre 10 then bought the business and carried on as Palmers Garden World, which was bought by current owners the Durrant family in the early 2000s and relabeled into its current format.
Under its present structure, The Garden Depot Hastings operates two complimentary businesses – the high-profile retail garden centre, and a contract landscaping entity which sources its products from the site and other nurseries.
Now The Garden Depot Hastings business at 1308 Pakowhai Road, is being marketed for sale for $1.6 million through Bayleys Napier. Salesperson Rodger Howie said the garden centre could be bought as a ‘turn-key’ business.
“The owners would also consider selling just the landscaping division as a stand-alone business separate to the gardening supply arm. The Garden Depot Hastings’ landscaping services include hydro seeding, soil screening, profiling, mulching, weeding, maintenance, and planting - with a strong book of forward orders,” said Howie.
“The landscape division has a wide client base a covering both commercial and residential customers. Their clients have been with them for a long time and have good working relationships.”
Howie said The Garden Depot Hastings operated from a 9,068sqm freehold premises which encompassed 20 customer car parks to allow trading seven days a week.
In the 2019/2020 financial year, The Garden Depot Hastings turned over more than $1.5 million in revenue.
Total sales for the current financial year were on track to exceed $2 million – including several large projects which came on stream in the final quarter of last year.
Building infrastructure at the Pakowhai Road property features a retail shop used to house packaged and perishable stock, and an office, while most of the plants are laid out in neat rows outside – leaving trees, shrubs and flowers free to absorb natural light and rainfall.
A well patronized food and beverage establishment also operates from within the 1,055sqm building.
Adjacent to the public retail areas is a nursery amenity – including plastic houses – where a large portion of The Garden Depot Hastings’ stock is grown to minimise the need for buying stock from wholesale growers.
“As with many parts of New Zealand’s economy, the garden supplies landscaping sector has rebounded strongly from the initial shock of the first Covid-19 lockdown,” Howie said.
