EDUCATORS IN TE REO SHOW INNOVATION
A new report from the Education Review Office found that while schools will feel the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown into 2021, one group in particular thrived: Maori- medium education.
The report, based on interviews with teachers, principals and students, found some students had lost a term in learning as a result of the lockdown, and the impact would be felt into the 2021 academic year.
But the review into Maori- medium education - where students are taught all or some curriculum subjects in the Maori language for at least 51 per cent of the time - found staying connected and using resources creatively, allowed students to succeed.
"Covid-19 created a multitude of challenges for those in Maori- medium education and the long- term impacts of this global pandemic are not yet fully understood. What is clear and worthy of recognition is the way in which those in Maori-medium education responded to such challenges," the report concluded.
"Leaders demonstrated unwavering levels of care and support to learners, their staff and whanau, hapu and iwi, which engendered high levels of learner and whanau engagement in distance learning."
ERO's deputy chief executive evaluation and review Maori, Lynda Pura-Watson (Ngati Kahungunu, Kai Tahu), said the name of the report, Te Kahu Whakahaumaru, talked about the weaving together of communities.
Collaboration went beyond whanau, hapu and iwi, and included working with community organisations like local marae, KidsCan, Breakfast Club, Fruit in Schools, Whanau Ora and the Ministry of Health, taking a holistic approach to a child's education and wellbeing.
The sector also used resources creatively, she said.
"Whatever resources were made available to Maori-medium, it is what they did with it. What we saw in the Maori-medium space was having the resources, and being innovative."
One student who was interviewed for the report said they were able to plan their own learning programme, and their kaiako (teacher), encouraged them to be adventurous.
Education Review Office CEO Nicholas Pole said the Maori- medium education sector went above and beyond for learners, whanau, hapu and iwi.
"We hope that this suite of reports provides examples of good practice and useful recommendations to help schools and services support students as they return this year."
The report raised concerns about the impact of lockdown on children from disadvantaged backgrounds.
