TODDLER BEHAVIOUR HARDEST HIT
If you notice a drastic and negative change in your toddler's behaviour since the Covid-19 lockdown, you're not alone, finds Serena Solomon .
--------------------
Charlotte Gurnell's 3-year-old daughter regressed in her potty training and invented an imaginary friend. The tantrums of Olivia Rysenbry's normally sweet-natured 3-year-old daughter intensified.
Victoria Gray's 3-year-old son switched to a short attention span and didn't play as well with his little brother.
According to a Nib parenting survey, parents of preschool- aged children saw their kids experience a spike in stress, tantrums and rapid mood swings as well as other behavioural challenges over the seven weeks New Zealand was in lockdown starting in March.
There was a 20 per cent jump to 32 per cent of parents who noticed an increase in irritability, anger and short temperedness during lockdown, according to the survey of 1200 parents.
Parents were asked at the end of August how their children behaved before, during and after lockdown, which started on March 23.
About 15 per cent of parents noticed a jump in stress and anxiety in their child as well as a decrease in motivation. Parents who observed drastic mood swings in their preschooler increased from 10 to 27 per cent.
As preschool-age children thrive on routine, the survey results do not surprise parenting experts, given the sudden shock to everyday rhythm that the lockdown caused.
"They love the safety of knowing where they are going and who will be with them and who they will see and what will happen when they are there," said Kylie Johnston, a parenting coach at the Heart Centred Coach. "There's a sense of safety in that for them."
Unlike teenagers, who are more used to dealing with change, preschool-aged children haven't developed that skill or perspective, according to Johnston.
"Newborn babies you can cart around anyway," said neuroscience and parenting educator Nathan Wallis. "From about nine months, they start to hit routines and routine gives them predictability."
For Rysenbry, who lives in Onehunga, Auckland, activities like going to daycare, a trip to the supermarket or getting in the car were stimulating activities for her two kids that stopped during the national and Auckland lockdowns.
"We had to find a new rhythm and recalibrate," she said.
Once the family of four developed a new lockdown routine, the behaviour of Rysenbry's 3-year-old, who was especially impacted, began to improve.
Children of preschool age also haven't developed a frontal cortex yet, which is the part of the brain that controls rational thinking, Wallis said. In other words, you can reason with teenage children and explain a pandemic to them but your toddler and preschooler might not grasp why they suddenly can't go to daycare or see their friends.
Gurnell's daughter, Sophie, couldn't see her grandmother, a regular occurrence because the grandmother lives near their Taupo home.
Sophie wasn't old enough to comprehend why she couldn't see her grandmother. The few occasions where the grandmother waved from the end of the driveway and left presents only made the situation worse, Gurnell said.
"She was getting too upset because she wanted to hug her [grandmother]," said Gurnell, who gave birth to her second child a week before the lockdown started, which was another big change for her 3-year-old.
Johnston suggested age- appropriate material to teach children about the pandemic like a comic book that focuses on washing hands and sneezing into elbows.
"Keep it brief without scaring them," said Johnston, adding that parents should stop to acknowledge their children's concerns rather than trying to distract them or move on too quickly.
Parents' own stress can also be reflected in a young child's behaviour. "The child looks to the parent to ascertain how much danger there is or what reaction to have," said Wallis. "If a baby falls over and dad goes 'You're right, mate' the baby just gets up and keeps going."
Nib's parenting survey showed that some children's behaviour did improve when the lockdown ended, but many other preschoolers were still unsettled for weeks after.
Rysenbry's daughter was excited to return to daycare after the lockdown. However, it only lasted a week.
She went from a little girl who waved to her mother goodbye to crying every time her mother left. "It was definitely very noticeable," said Rysenbry.
