Two of the cases are students at Mangatangi School, which will close its doors...
Two of the cases are students at Mangatangi School, which will close its doors today
Three new cases of Covid-19 surfaced last night in Waikato, less than 24 hours before Cabinet ministers decide whether to move Auckland out of level 4 lockdown.
The three new cases are household members of a remand prisoner who was also announced yesterday as a positive case.
Two of the three household members attend Mangatangi School on the Hauraki Plains and one was symptomatic while in class on Thursday.
All three positive cases, and an accompanying adult caregiver, are being moved to a quarantine facility.
The school has been closed and parents have been contacted. Arrangements are being made for the students and their families to be tested.
A pop-up testing centre is being set up at Wharekawa in Whakatiwai and local residents with symptoms are being urged to get tested.
Epidemiologist Professor Michael Baker said these new Waikato cases highlight the need for mask use inside schools.
In level 2, students aren’t required to wear masks, however Baker said a school setting allows for the virus to “spread quite quickly”.
Baker said these cases could tip today’s decision. “Alert level 2 has its limitations if there is transmission, it’s not really able to stamp out an outbreak.’’
The new developments come as Cabinet meets today to face one of the most difficult decisions of the pandemic, with Baker saying the wrong call poses the potential for a Sydney-style flare-up.
After nearly five weeks in lockdown, Aucklanders will today learn whether the Government will stick to the in-principle decision it made to move the city down to level 3, and the rest of the country back to less restrictive level 2 settings, at midnight tomorrow.
That comes after 27 new cases were reported in the community yesterday — at least three of them as-yet unlinked.
But Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern earlier said Auckland’s hard work had “paid off”, and that those still-sizeable daily numbers coming through reflected how Delta was continuing to infect people within households.
“We might have had a positive case days and days ago but slowly those family members who have become infected come through as positives,” she said. “I know that is really anxious-making for people when they see those numbers. They don’t always tell the full story but it does tell us Delta’s tail is long and it is hard.”
Director of public health Caroline McElnay was “cautiously optimistic” that most of the outbreak — now totalling 1050 cases — was under control and that it was its long tail being seen.
More cases were expected in the coming days as some of the recent cases were from large households, where contacts were expected to test positive — but they were already in isolation. Thirteen people were in hospital, and four in ICU.
Asked if Auckland was ready for a step-down, Covid-19 modeller Professor Shaun Hendy said he’d prefer the region stay at level 4 until the cluster was stamped out.
“I’d just like to get this behind us, and there is a risk that, if we go to level 3, that we might continue to have to battle this over the next couple of months.”
While the outbreak’s R value — or average number of people one infected person passed the virus on to — was likely below one, Hendy felt contact tracers weren’t in front of it. “We are still seeing cases acquired in the community, as opposed to just households.”
Level 3 would create more locations for the virus to spread, making the task for contact tracers even more difficult, and possibly increasing the rate of transmission.
“The worst-case scenario is that in a couple of weeks, things start to look like they were in New South Wales six weeks ago, where we have case numbers clearly starting to rise,” he said. “And then, however unpalatable it might be, we would have to go back to level 4.
New South Wales’ healthcare system isn’t coping with its Delta outbreak and ours would certainly struggle.”
Baker, from Otago University, similarly warned of following Sydney’s fate.
He described a potential scenario of cases continuing to track up under alert level 3 and possibly leaking out into the rest of the country.
“We could even face a situation where much of the country winds up at level 3 for several months to keep a lid on the virus while we’re getting our vaccination coverage up to a level where it doesn’t overwhelm our health system.”
Asked whether New Zealand could get to zero cases in the community, Ardern said it would be possible to achieve it but tough to do.
“We are now on the trajectory to reach very high rates of vaccination ... once we’re reaching those high levels at that point we’ll be seeking to avoid those levels in the future.”
With more than 53,000 doses administered on Saturday, 73.1 per cent of eligible Kiwis had now received at least their first jab of Pfizer vaccine.
Seventy-eight per cent of eligible Aucklanders have had their first dose.
“You can see how rapidly we are moving up through those vaccination rates — we need to keep that momentum up.”
