'PERFECT STORM': BUSINESSES RESPOND TO LEVEL 4 LOCKDOWN
News the Covid-19 level 4 lockdown will continue until at least the end of next Tuesday for the whole country is a "huge blow" but not a surprise, businesses say.
On Friday, Prime Minister Jacinda Adern said alert level 4, which was put in place just before midnight on Tuesday, will be extended for the entire country for another four days at least.
Eleven new cases of Covid-19 were reported in Auckland and Wellington on Friday, bringing the number of cases to 31.
Restaurant Association chief executive Marisa Bidois said the hardest part was the stress and anxiety placed on business owners. "Whilst we're all focused on the health of the nation, we also need to recognise the strain on all of those small businesses throughout the country that cannot work from home."
The uncertainty was very difficult, she said.
"We are in constant contact with our members and they are telling us that they are anxious, fearful for their livelihoods and in some cases exhausted."
Buy NZ Made executive director Dane Ambler said businesses across the country were facing a perfect storm of a skills shortage, increased shipping costs and delays, and now Covid in the community.
"Once again, we are reminded of the importance of supporting local businesses," Ambler said. "While it's encouraging to see the Government once again roll out support like the wage subsidy scheme, resurgence support payment, the leave support scheme and short-term absence payment, what businesses really need is cash flowing through the till."
Hospitality NZ's Canterbury president Peter Morrison said the extended lockdown was "pretty depressing" for members, but they understood the reasoning behind it. He said they were looking at asking the Government to defer payment of GST and provisional tax due on August 28.
"What I'm worried about are the businesses that have been struggling ever since Covid started, they've had just an average summer ... how are they going to get through the winter, their cash flows will be so low."
Morrison said he would also like an exemption for work to resume on the new Te Pae convention centre which is scheduled to host its first conference in October, and was expected to provide a significant boost to Christchurch's hospitality industry.
"I can't see why it shouldn't be seen as a significant building of national importance that should still be able to be worked on."
Business NZ chief executive Kirk Hope said, "We along with many other organisations have been pointing out to the Government, and most particularly the Ministry of Health that if they'd deployed saliva testing they could do a lot more testing at the border on a more regular basis than they're doing with the nasopharyngeal testing.
"They just really haven't picked this up, and they need to get more agile at responding to what people who are working in those environments are seeing. It's far too centralised and frankly if their behaviours mean we end up in lockdown, it's pretty frustrating."
