CASE A'S COVID SAVVY A BONUS
Case A was personally thanked by the prime minister for getting a Covid-19 test when he did, setting a snap lockdown in motion. What might have happened if he didn't? Kate Newton reports
--------------------
Nearly two years into the pandemic, the mental arithmetic is familiar: you wake up, you feel a bit groggy, and you weigh things up. Are you truly feeling unwell or is this just a particularly bleary-eyed morning? Would a coffee cure it? Is that scratch in your throat real or imagined? Get a Covid test - or get a grip?
The 58-year-old man we now know as 'Case A' was a few hours into a weekend away in Coromandel when he first noticed symptoms. He and his wife stayed on, wandered Coromandel Town, visited the local shops.
Maybe it was a missed opportunity to head home and get a test a day or two early. But it was likely the same conclusion many people have come to over the last few months when they've felt mildly unwell: stop being paranoid, you're fine.
By Monday, back home in Devonport, the man wasn't fine. This is where his behaviour deviates from the many people who might have chalked up those symptoms to a winter cold: he went to his GP and got a Covid swab. He stopped at the pharmacy - and then he went home and stayed there.
The rest is very public history. The next day his positive result came back. Within hours both his illness and his holiday were national news and at midnight, New Zealand's second national level 4 lockdown came into effect.
The man's actions also diverged from many New Zealanders in another very important way: unlike most of the 3 million people who have downloaded the Covid Tracer app, he was actively using it.
"I do want to commend the case for being a frequent user of the New Zealand Covid Tracer app," Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield said at Tuesday's press conference. "This has helped very much in helping us speed up identifying locations of interest."
As the list of locations of interest has grown - and yesterday the discovery of positive cases in Wellington emerged - a sense of foreboding about this outbreak of the Delta variant has grown. We won't know for some days yet where this outbreak is going to end up. But we do know that, five days in, things could be a lot worse.
This is in no small measure because of the actions of a handful of ordinary Kiwis who, at critical moments, have done the right thing.
Test, test, test
In the days preceding each of New Zealand's Covid-19 outbreaks, the virus has felt like a remote threat to almost all but those working at the border. We have twice had stretches of over 100 days without community transmission.
It would be entirely understandable for those who turned out to be the first known community cases - who had no connection with the border - to have discounted Covid-19 as the cause of their symptoms. It's only because they didn't that a public health response could be started, giving us a fighting chance at retaining our zero Covid status.
The first cases of the August 2020 cluster occurred in a South Auckland family, some of whom had been on holiday in Rotorua. One relative, who was the first case identified, required some prompting to get a test, but importantly, did get one. Her family subsequently went into immediate isolation.
In the latest cluster, three of the other cases identified early on were also picked up because the infected people - all of them young workers in their 20s - proactively chose to get tested when they developed symptoms, before anyone was aware Covid-19 was once again spreading in the community.
Professor Shaun Hendy, who is part of the Covid-19 modelling research cluster, Te Punaha Matatini, says the actions of those early cases were "really important, especially given what we're learning now about ... the speed at which it's spread."
The infectious Delta strain of the virus "did an awful lot of work" in the week between August 8 or 9 (which health officials now believe is the date of incursion) and August 17 when the first positive test results came back, he says.
"[Without those tests] we could've been looking at a much larger outbreak even by today.
"So these people have done a phenomenal job and it's great that so many of them went and did that. We weren't relying on just one person."
Public health messages do seem to be getting through, Hendy says.
"I also wonder if it's people just watching what's happening in New South Wales at the moment."
Modelling that Hendy and his colleagues did late this week estimates that, on average, the outbreak should peak at about 100 cases.
The group has not yet looked at what the outcome could have been with a few extra days of spread, had the Devonport man and those other early contacts not got tested.
"But you can use your own imagination - there's potential for numbers to go up by a factor of five to six every few days."
The domino effect
One of the early cases is a teacher at Avondale College, which is one of the largest schools in the country with a roll of about 2500. Another is a nurse at Auckland City Hospital who worked four shifts while she was unwittingly infectious. Many of the cases are young people, who over the weekend did what young people do: went out, partied, visited their friends.
Getting early tests once they developed symptoms could not change any of that - but from Wednesday morning when their positive results came back, the country was already in lockdown. Hundreds and maybe even thousands of close contacts, who otherwise might have been going about their lives, were self- isolating.
Another few days without a positive test - and the ensuing lockdown - and the equation could have changed dramatically. Instead of 100 cases, models could be estimating an outbreak peak of 500 or 600 cases. A week more without someone bothering to get a test - and cases could hit the thousands.
When cases go up, so do hospitalisations and deaths. There have been 26 deaths from Covid in New Zealand, almost all of them during the first wave. In total, 139 people have been hospitalised - about 5 per cent of all New Zealand's cases.
Border workers, contact tracers and public health staff have played a critical role in protecting New Zealand from the scenarios playing out around the world. So too have the ordinary people who have played it safe, risked the stigma of their private lives being laid bare from Ashley Bloomfield's podium, and got tested when that tickle in their throat could no longer be ignored.
"Can I thank again our first positive case that was identified on Tuesday," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said at a press conference on Thursday this week.
"If it wasn't for you getting tested when you did, this could be a much, much more difficult situation."
