CONTINUED LOCKDOWN SCUPPERS FESTIVAL PLANS
Mouldy burger buns and freshly caught oysters turning fishy. Thousands of meat patties on the verge of going bad. Delivery boxes sitting for hours on the steps of foodie hotspots. Welcome to Wellington On a Plate at alert level 4.
Halfway through the Southern Hemisphere's biggest annual culinary festival, more than 300 restaurants, bars, cafes and eateries participating in Wellington on a Plate were thrust into sudden lockdown. With news yesterday that Covid-19 had reached the capital, there is no sign that the festival will be getting back on track any time soon. But after surveying participating restaurants and bars, festival organisers said yesterday they would restart the festival when Wellington reaches level 2 - whenever that may be.
At level 2, venues would be able to restart Burger and Cocktail Wellington, with the full festival set to complete the remaining two weeks whenever Wellington reaches level 1. No additional fees will be charged, as one-off participant fees were made prior to the festival starting.
The festival was working with participants to postpone any planned events, however the reality for some businesses meant it wasn't feasible to postpone. In those cases, refunds will be available for ticket holders.
In the meantime, festival director Sarah Meikle said participating businesses would be working with food rescue agencies to redistribute produce that would otherwise go off. But there's confusion from some owners about whether they can even enter their businesses under the current measures.
Shaun Clouston, executive chef at Logan Brown on Cuba St, has been going back to tend to half a dozen live crayfish, but has otherwise been "twiddling thumbs" worrying about his loss of stock.
"We're going to lose a fair bit of product, but it's right across the board. Many restaurants are in the same boat," Clouston said. "It is what it is. We just have to roll with the punches."
Because the country plunged into level 4 the same day as the first Covid-19 case was found, hospitality businesses had little time to organise, Clouston said. Last year during level 4, restaurants had a couple of days to prepare to re-distribute food to charities, place salvageable items in freezers and divvy up leftovers among staff.
But given the speed of this year's lockdown, many restaurants and cafes - which were extremely busy with the popular Burger Wellington festival event - had to frantically shut up shop. "There's food everywhere," Clouston said of his businesses. Left behind at his Bellamy's at Parliament were two giant king fish sitting in the fridge. "I'm wondering what to do with them ... It needs a bit of a tidy up."
While many hospitality businesses are hoping it won't take long until they can serve up their burgers and cocktails in-person, Lydia Suggate, a hospitality owner in Wellington, said even contactless was better than nothing.
Suggate - who runs institutions like Nolita, Little Beer Quarter and The Botanist - said it was a relief that participating festival businesses were able to get through the first two weeks of Dine Wellington unscathed. Things were just ramping up with Burger Wellington when the bad news of lockdown hit.
"Our freezers were full very quickly. A lot of food will be OK over three days, but five days is our limit. We're going to have to throw stuff away ... The real shame is the waste. It's a lot of money and food down the drain. We're going to have to buy it all in again once we re-open and re- prep."
Meikle said the festival had prepared contingency plans for this year's festival, but also added the team "can't really actually plan" because of the constantly-evolving situation.
Hospitality had been hit much harder than other sectors, Meikle said, as food product expires. Staff were also doing it particularly tough. "Remember the guy down the road who makes you coffee. Be nice to him."
As Wellington's lockdown continues, food rescue services are readying for an influx of WOAP- related donations.
Gary Sutton, manager at Wellington's Compassion Soup Kitchen said its facility at 132 Tory St was open and keeping busy. It was expecting more businesses to get in touch as lockdown continued and stored food neared its expiry date.
Each day the volunteer-run kitchen serves as many as 200 hot meals for people in need. It's also providing meals to marae, Wellington City Mission and the Wellington Homeless Women's Trust.
Local businesses can donate unused stock, but must arrange this with the kitchen first so appropriate health measures can be taken.
Kaibosh food rescue was also open under level 4 with strong health and safety precautions, said its manager Matt Dagger. There was an "incredible surging demand" for food during this year's lockdown, he said, adding that donations were appreciated wherever possible.
