'LIFE STILL NOTHING LIKE NORMAL'
After four-and-a-half weeks of lockdown, New Zealand will move from Covid-19 alert level four to level three just before midnight on Monday, April 27.
Businesses will have a week to get ready to open, with employers able to re-enter premises to receive stock if necessary, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said yesterday.
BNZ economists said easing the restrictions will not stop a surge in unemployment, and a correction in the housing market.
"The extent of the impact on employees of the current lockdown is almost beyond comprehension."
According to government data, 1.6 million people, or 60 per cent of all those employed, were receiving the wage subsidy.
"The Government cannot afford to dole this amount out every 12 weeks so it will need to see as many people back on-the- job, by the end of this quarter, as possible.
"And, alas, for those who are not, it is highly likely this will be because the businesses they now work for either no longer exist, are no longer sustainable or have been forced to lower staff numbers on an ongoing basis."
Life will look nothing like normal in level three, they said. Businesses would have to show they could operate with social distancing; there would be lags in getting up and running again; and some employees would still not be happy to return to work. "And, where will the demand for some of the goods and services come from that these re-employed workers will be tasked with providing?"
Most businesses have been unable to operate since the country went into level four on March 26, unless they were classed essential or staff were able to work from home.
Last week, Ardern laid out the rules under level three, saying businesses that could operate without face-to-face contact can open their doors.
The number of employees at work under coronavirus level three will double.
Under level three, general retail, hardware stores and restaurants can open, but only for online or phone purchases, and contactless delivery or click and collect.
Bars, cafes, restaurants and shops along with other businesses that could not operate contactlessly will have to remain closed.
Businesses only accessed by staff and without a customer function can open under strict health and safety and physical distancing rules.
Business association EMA said many businesses would be relieved - particularly in manufacturing and construction - but others like retailers would be disappointed at the wait until next Tuesday.
"This seems to strike a good balance between our country's health and the economy, but people must be vigilant and stick strictly to Health and Safety guidelines,"said EMA chief executive Brett O'Riley.
There was hope the review of level three after two weeks could mean relief for the retail and hospitality sectors, he said.
FREIGHT
The Road Transport Forum was disappointed at the delay.
"It isn't just 'two business days', as many businesses in New Zealand operate seven days," said chief executive Nick Leggett. "Like many businesses, particularly the small and medium sized businesses, road freight transport has suffered under the Alert Level 4 lockdown. Some of those businesses may not recover, and unfortunately, that will mean hardship for the business owners and the workers they will have to let go."
Despite the restrictions under level three, there would be a lot of freight on the move as forestry, wood processors, construction, manufacturers, contactless retail and home removal companies mostly get back to work.
CONSTRUCTION
Under level three, the construction sector must follow stringent rules to reduce the risk of spreading coronavirus, including washing tools and equipment twice daily.
During the lockdown the construction industry's standard- setting body Construction Health and Safety New Zealand, in consultation with the industry, developed a standard to help control the risk of Covid-19.
The new rules will slow down construction but they are an improvement on no workflow at all.
RETAIL
Retail NZ chief executive Greg Harford said the delay was disappointing for the sector.
The rules at level three needed to be more flexible for shops, and retailers had lobbied Government to apply the one-in, one-out rule for shops, and consider customer registration at stores, he said.
Physical stores must stay closed unless they are "essential services", such as supermarkets, pharmacies, petrol stations and dairies. However, all online trading will be allowed, not just for essential items, as long as it can be done safely and with no face-to-face contact with customers.
AVIATION
Life for Air New Zealand will not get much easier under level three, with domestic travel generally not allowed aside from some exceptions.
Acceptable reasons to travel include workers travelling to do essential work, people going to work or school in a neighbouring region, for medical or compassionate grounds, and people relocating a home or business.
People who were in the wrong place when the lockdown started can move through New Zealand once, in one direction, to get home. New Zealanders can move to or from the Cook Islands, Niue, and Tokelau once, and in one direction.
Level three still has strict rules, with people required to stay home in their bubble other than for "essential personal movement", so holidays are not allowed.
FORESTRY
All forestry work was classed as non-essential and shut down in level four.
In preparation for leaving the lockdown, the industry has compiled guidelines for working under alert level three and liaising with the Government.
As well as pre-plant spraying, which was banned under level four, forest companies are keen to get on with harvesting.
At level three, numbers of people have to be minimised on- site, and workers have to maintain a distance of at least one metre while working. People must travel to and from forestry sites where possible, and wipe down vehicles and machinery.
