GOVT TO STUDY VACCINE EFFECT ON LOCKDOWN
High vaccination rates where more than 90 per cent of people aged 12 and older are fully vaccinated against Covid-19 will bring fewer pandemic restrictions, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has announced, as Auckland faces at least two more weeks under lockdown.
Government will this week analyse Covid-19 modelling data to look at how vaccinations will impact what restrictions are needed to stop any future outbreaks, Ardern said. A successful vaccination programme is key to getting past using lockdowns to control an outbreak.
"You will have seen a lot of discussion overseas on the level of restrictions that are still in place and the level of hospitalisations where we have lower numbers [of people vaccinated]", she said in a post-Cabinet announcement yesterday. "You will have heard Dr Bloomfield saying he's aiming for 90 plus [per cent] of eligible New Zealanders, so that's the range in which we want to see people aspiring to. That's the kind of range that means we have fewer restrictions."
Ardern also brought some relief for Auckland, which she confirmed would shift down to alert level 3 at 11.59pm tonight with a review due on October 4. Part of the Waikato with three new community cases relating to an infectious remand prisoner who crossed the Auckland boundary will temporarily move into a "bespoke level 4" for five days. The rest of the country stays at level 2.
Ardern said the use of localised restrictions, such as the section 70 order requiring people in Mangatangi in northern Waikato to stay at home, get tested and monitor for any symptoms, was something other countries have used when they have finished vaccinations. "Our public health officials, if they saw a flu outbreak in an aged care residential facility, have the ability to close it down and manage it. Likewise for other areas of work, if they see outbreaks of other infectious diseases they have the ability to take those local approaches."
About 73 per cent of eligible people have had one dose of the vaccine, with 38 per cent fully vaccinated.
