LANDLORDS RECEIVING RENTS QUICKER POST-LOCKDOWN
Tenants are paying their commercial rents more promptly now than during lockdown, according to data from property tech company Re-Leased.
Last month, 85 per cent of commercial rent was paid within 30 days, compared to 80 per cent in June, 69 per cent in May, and 63 per cent in April, and the pre-Covid-19 monthly average of 90 per cent.
Re-Leased is a cloud-based software management system. Its data is anonymous and aggregated from more than 10,000 commercial leases in New Zealand from about 350 clients.
This comes as Statistics New Zealand data reveals a stronger than expected rebound in retail spending by consumers since the end of the level 4 lockdown.
Tenants were also signing up for shorter leases than previously, accelerating a trend that was evident before Covid-19, Re-Leased chief executive Tom Wallace said.
While retail tenants were the slowest to pay in May and June, the latest data for last month shows that retailers were close to other tenants in offices and industrial properties when it came to paying their rent within 30 days of the invoice.
Retail recorded 84 per cent of rent paid in July, compared to 87 per cent by office tenants and 88 per cent for industrial tenants, according to Re-Leased.
Nationally last month, Canterbury at 90 per cent payment and Wellington at 93 per cent had returned to pre-Covid levels of rental payments.
Waikato at 96 per cent was slightly ahead of its pre-Covid average of 93 per cent, though Auckland, at 80 per cent, was lower than its pre-Covid level of 87 per cent.
However, commercial rent payment was slower in Northland at 70 per cent, and Otago and Southland at 78 per cent recorded their lowest rental collection rates, well below their pre-Covid levels of 90 per cent and 95 per cent respectively.
Wallace said the lower rates of rental payments in Northland and Otago/Southland reflected more businesses reliant on tourism. Northland's forestry industry had also been hard hit by Covid.
New leases, excluding co- working spaces, were being signed for shorter periods than they were in June.
Across office, retail and industrial, the average length signed last month was down 6.6 per cent to 34 months, just shy of three years.
In office, the average lease length signed fell 7.8 per cent to 26 months, in retail it fell 7.7 per cent to 48 months and in industrial it fell 3.6 per cent to 40 months.
Wallace said the data showed tenants were a little more uncertain and unwilling to commit to as long a lease as before.
Also, landlords were willing to strike deals to keep filling their buildings.
