With all the extras, please
When will your favourite fast-food stores be open?
New Zealand’s fast-food chains are getting ready to start serving the nation again following a temporary hiatus during the coronavirus lockdown.
But when exactly can you expect to get your fast-food fill?
McDonald’s
McDonald’s was confident the majority of its restaurants with drive-throughs would open across the country when lockdown lifts.
About 130 of its 170 restaurants offered drive-through and the company was working on providing contactless training to its 10,000 staff and ensuring further hygiene, sanitation and food-safety procedures.
It was also in the process of working with its suppliers to confirm whether it could access stock and help franchisees ensure they could openly safely.
Subway
All 250 Subway restaurants across New Zealand would open from Tuesday through delivery or contactless pick-up.
Customers could have their meals delivered by Uber Eats and could order them off the Subway app or online.
Domino’s
Domino’s expects to open most stores for contactless delivery from Tuesday, with remaining stores opening the next day.
KFC, Pizza Hut, Taco Bell, and Carl’s Jr Restaurant Brands, which operates KFC, Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and Carl’s Jr, were not able to report when the restaurants would open to the public.
The company said further information would be made available in the coming days.
Burger King
Burger King was hoping to open its 83 outlets on Tuesday.
Once open, Burger King would offer drive-through and delivery through Uber Eats.
Kiwis hoping to move away from the stovetop to the restaurant table next week will be forced to wait a little longer despite the move to alert level 3.
But it’s not all bad news, with meals from restaurants only a phone call or few clicks of the mouse away.
Uber Eats would be back in action from Tuesday next week in time for lunch-time trade with contactless delivery the default setting.
Restaurant Association chief executive Marisa Bidois said: “Restaurants, cafes and takeaways will be operating in a contactless world.
“All orders at this stage will be basically taken online or via the phone and most payments will need to be contactless as well.”
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment website said operators could sell prepared food and non-alcoholic drinks by contactless delivery and collection.
Bidois said many operators would not have the capacity to open while for others it would not be worth the effort. “We’re looking at around 20 per cent, one in five, businesses not being open at the end of this, many have been hit hard,” she told the Herald.
She encouraged people to support businesses by purchasing products from those were able to reopen.
Many of the Restaurant Association’s 3600 members were crying out for more funding and they were hoping to see action from the Government soon.
“Our businesses are crying out for more assistance.
“That’s the major message we’re getting from our industry at the moment,” Bidois said. “We think that the Government is aware that small to medium businesses do need extra help at this time but we haven’t seen any action on that just yet.
“We’re hoping that will change though.”
