Fears of new case, hotel in lockdown
There were unconfirmed reports last night of a third person testing positive for Covid-19 yesterday.
Early yesterday afternoon the Ministry of Health reported two new cases in managed isolation facilities, bringing the total number of active cases to seven.
One was a toddler at the Jet Park Hotel, the quarantine facility in Auckland, and the second was a 59-year-old woman who is at the Grand Millennium managed isolation facility, also in Auckland.
However, the Herald understands a person staying at the Novotel in Auckland had also tested positive last night and the hotel was in full lockdown.
Alexa Cook, who has been in isolation at the Novotel Auckland Airport since June 13, said she was also informed of the new case at 8.25 last night.
“We had a call to our hotel room from reception and it was a guy from the New Zealand Defence Force saying, ‘Please stay in your room, the hotel has gone into full lockdown because there’s been a positive Covid-19 test from inside this hotel.”
She said she wasn’t told whether it was one or more cases, just that it “was one bubble”.
Cook said being in full lockdown means she can’t leave her room for anything, whereas previously she was allowed into the foyer, and outside for exercise.
At this stage, Cook said she doesn’t know when she’ll be allowed out of her room.
“The Defence Force did say that there would be an information flyer left outside peoples’ rooms this evening to give us more information on what will be happening and what we need to do,” she said last night.
Another woman, who only wants to be known as TK, said she has been at the Novotel since Thursday night after flying in from Australia.
She said last night that she also received a phone call saying a person staying there had tested positive and everyone would need to be tested today.
“All they have told us is to stay in our rooms as there has been a case of Covid.”
She said she had seen a nurse each day to have her temperature taken but there hadn’t been any testing since she landed on Thursday. This was despite the fact testing is meant to happen on days 3 and 12.
“We haven’t been tested at all, now we are getting tested tomorrow because of this one coming up tonight.”
The Ministry of Health would not comment, only saying there would be an update at tomorrow’s briefing.
Both cases announced earlier yesterday were recent arrivals from overseas and both were detected within managed isolation facilities, the Ministry of Health said in a statement.
Neither involved community transmission.
The first case was the young child of the couple announced on Saturday as cases who have recently arrived from India.
“We are pleased to report that all family members are doing well at the Jet Park Hotel, the quarantine facility in Auckland,” the ministry said.
“We will not be providing exact details of the child’s age but can say they are under 2 years old.”
The second case is a 59-year-old woman who travelled from Delhi and who arrived in Auckland on June 15 on flight AI1316.
She was tested while at the Grand Millennium managed isolation facility and was travelling with her partner, who has also been tested, and whose result is pending.
Active follow-up is now under way.
An update would be provided today on this case and the follow-up of other cases from last week, the ministry said.
This couple are also now in quarantine at the Jet Park.
Everyone who was at the Grand Millennium while those people were there has or will be tested as part of the testing on days 3 and 12 that is now routine at all managed isolation facilities, yesterday’s statement confirms.
“This result was picked up in the woman’s day 3 test and is an example of the new testing regime working as it should.”
As of June 20, there were 36 children aged 0 to 9 in New Zealand who had been infected with Covid-19. All cases have since recovered.
There have been seven cases of Covid-19 detected in returning passengers in the last week.
