EXERCISE RESTRAINT WHEN GOING OUTDOORS
Health officials have urged Kiwis to keep up daily exercise during the nationwide lockdown but there has been confusion on what is allowed.
Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said yesterday people were allowed to travel in a vehicle to get to a suitable place to exercise but should not be travelling "miles".
"If you are living on a hill, for example, and you have children and you need to take them somewhere flat, then you can use your car for that.
"But we don't want people travelling across town . . . so it should be to the nearest place you can go."
He said the same applied for elderly and those living in high-density areas where it might be tough to exercise and follow safe physical distancing practices. If it was too difficult to follow safe physical distancing, then people should consider whether it was really necessary to exercise at that time, Hipkins said.
So far, compliance with these rules had been "good", he said.
Here is everything you need to know about exercising during lockdown, and what it means for you and your whanau:
Outdoor activities
Outdoor activities are limited under level 4. You must stay in your bubble, maintain physical distancing, and keep walks short, local and for essential exercise only.
Stick to simple outdoor exercise and avoid activities where you can get injured or lost. For example, do not go swimming, surfing, boating, hunting or tramping. It is important emergency services remain available to support the response to Covid-19.
Organised sports, contact activities and sharing sporting equipment with people outside your bubble is prohibited. Playgrounds are closed and so are all indoor venues and sporting facilities, including clubrooms and gyms. The NZ Mountain Safety Council has compiled a website where you can check which few activities you can still do in your region.
Face coverings
It is not mandatory to wear a face covering when exercising but it is encouraged. Hipkins said a mask should be worn when it was practical to do so or when others are nearby.
You can't meet people who are not in your bubble to exercise, and you should avoid touching and using high touch areas like park benches or gates.
It is also recommended you tell someone in your bubble where you are going and how long you plan to be gone.
Take a mobile phone with you so you can be contacted or can contact others if you need to.
All of these rules apply regardless of whether you have been vaccinated.
Breaches and enforcement
A police spokeswoman said police recommended exercise should be in your neighbourhood only.
