Couple face court date over Wānaka getaway
Charges of failing to comply with health order after inquiry
An Auckland couple who sparked widespread outrage after police said they absconded from the city’s alert level 4 lockdown and flew to a holiday home in Wānaka have been officially charged with a Covid-19-related offence.
Horse breeder and equestrian William Willis, the 35-year-old son of an Auckland District Court judge, and lawyer Hannah Rawnsley, 26, will both face charges. They’ve previously apologised for their conduct.
Police yesterday confirmed they have completed an investigation after more than a week and a half.
They are expected to appear in the Papakura District Court on October 14 charged with failing to comply with a Covid-19 health order. The charge carries a maximum punishment of six months’ in prison and a $4000 fine.
The case will be overseen by a Wellington-based judge to avoid any conflicts of interest, the Office of the Chief District Court Judge has told the Herald.
Police first approached the couple in Wānaka on the afternoon of September 11, after receiving a tip through the Covid-19 online compliance tool a day earlier. The two were allowed to leave Auckland for Hamilton because of their essential worker status and so on Thursday, September 9.
They were not, however, permitted under the lockdown rules to then take a commercial flight to Queenstown and continue on in a hired car for Wānaka, authorities have said.
The couple initially fought to keep secret their names, as well as Willis’ relation to Judge Mary-Beth Sharp. Their lawyer, Rachael Reed QC, asked for an unusual emergency hearing on Monday last week to seek suppression, even though her clients had not yet been charged.
Wellington-based District Court Judge Bruce Davidson granted the suppression for 24 hours so that the couple could file a new request with the High Court.
The couple issued a statement at 7pm the following evening identifying themselves and explaining they would no longer seek suppression.
“The decision that we took to travel to Wānaka last week was completely irresponsible and inexcusable,” the couple said. “We are deeply sorry for our actions and would like to unreservedly apologise to the Wānaka community, and to all the people of Aotearoa New Zealand, for what we did.”
Judge Sharp also issued a statement. She stressed that it was not issued in her capacity as a judicial official, that she had known nothing of the trip and that she supported the couple’s decision to drop their name suppression battle.
“Like the rest of New Zealand, I was appalled to learn of my son William and his partner’s actions over the weekend,” she said. “I was and am highly embarrassed.”
In their mea culpa, the couple said they had undergone routine Covid-19 testing as essential workers. They tested negative for the coronavirus before and after their trip, they said.
Queenstown Lakes Mayor Jim Boult said he was initially speechless after being told of the unwelcome visitors to Wānaka, but it soon gave way to fury.
“We are all aware of the pain that Auckland is going through at the moment. The last thing we want is to be in the same position,” he said. t.
Boult later said “there would be a high degree of unhappiness in our part of the world” if they weren’t still charged with a crime.
Since I the couple was confronted, there have been multiple other high-profile lockdown breach cases that have been more quickly investigated and resulted in police action. They include:
●A 53-year-old arrested at Wellington’s ferry terminal Monday night after police said he crossed Cook Strait with a caravan he’d bought in Christchurch, after misusing work exemption to leave Auckland.
●A woman, 24, and man, 41, arrested in Wellington on Saturday after allegedly travelling from Auckland.
●Two Aucklanders accused on Friday of using false documents to visit Taupō.
●Three essential workers from Auckland allegedly caught at Mt Ruapehu’s Turoa Ski Field last Wednesday.
●A man who last week boasted on TikTok of making a cross-border McDonald’s run.
●Two gang associates accused of trying to flee police on a gravel road near the lockdown border. The pair were later found to have over $100,000 in cash in the car and a boot full of KFC, police said.
“Every breach we come across is assessed individually to determine what inquiries need to be carried out,” a police spokesperson said. when asked about the length of the Wānaka investigation.
