Surgery delay for breast cancer patient costs pensioner $15,000
The day before lockdown began, Jennifer Rouse was diagnosed with stage two breast cancer and recommended for surgery.
But district health boards had shut down theatres, cancelling elective surgeries and specialist appointments, in preparation for the fight against the spread of coronavirus and the predicted onslaught of Covid-19 patients.
It left Rouse, a 66-year-old pensioner who would normally have gone on a six-to-eight week waiting list for the surgery, in limbo.
“Over the phone it was explained that because of the Covid-19 issue, no private or public non-urgent, breast surgeries were being done in Northland and no information was available as to when this service might be resumed,” Rouse said. “It was a huge shock.”
A former hospitality owner who lives on a yacht in Whāngārei, Rouse was unsure what impact Covid-19 would have on “non-urgent” surgeries and was told she could face up to six months waiting.
She wrote to several MPs, including Deputy Prime Minister Winston Peters and National MP in Whāngārei Dr Shane Reti, about her predicament.
On March 30 Reti responded, saying he had been contacted by many others in similar situations including the Northland Breast Cancer Support Trust.
Reti said the spread of Covid-19 in hospitals overseas was concerning and there was risk at being in hospital.
He said he would lobby for “high priority attention” for Northland women with breast cancer when the lockdown lifted.
“This is something that should reasonably have precedence over an elective hip or other non-cancerous surgery.”
Rouse decided she could not wait when it was unknown how long the wait would be.
She dipped into her meagre savings, negotiated a discounted price, and went private for the surgery in Auckland. It cost her $15,000.
The radiotherapy she needs remains on hold, and Rouse is now faced with trying to prove her eligibility to Northland District Health Board.
“I was born in England and have an Australian passport but I’ve lived in New Zealand for many years [on and off].”
Rouse complained to Health and Disability Commissioner Anthony Hill over the situation which has left her with little savings and no way to recoup the money.
“Cancer treatment is not elective. I have fallen through the cracks and feel very let down by the system.”
Hill has written to Health Minister David Clark over cases such as Rouse’s, warning patient lives were at risk if elective surgeries and specialist appointments continued to be referred back to GPs.
Hill told the Herald his office had received 50 complaints so far related to coronavirus, including cancelled and delayed treatment.
He said the consequences would be particularly serious for patients where early diagnosis and treatment was key to survival, including cancer and coronary disease.
Clark said there was work underway by the ministry and DHBs to address the issues.
Director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said that under alert level 3, which comes into effect on Tuesday, some planned care including elective surgeries and radiology will be provided.
“More detail will follow on that.”
