SHOULD WE STILL BE WEARING GLOVES to ward off coronavirus?
Kiwis are being asked to wash their hands and wear a mask while out and about amid the latest coronavirus outbreak. But what happened to gloves?
While wearing disposable gloves was never a Government recommendation, it wasn't unusual to see people using them to visit the supermarket during the first nationwide lockdown. Now, it's mostly just heath professionals spotted with protective gloves on.
At the time of New Zealand's first lockdown in March, experts and governments all over the globe were still unravelling the mysteries of Covid-19. But a key theme that emerged early on was the importance of prevention and hygiene, such as hand washing, to help stop spread.
Throughout New Zealand's Covid-19 response, the Government has sung the same tune when it's come to public guidelines: if you're sick, stay home, sneeze in your elbow, and wash your hands. While Auckland is at Covid-19 alert level 3 and the rest of the country is at level 2, health officials urge Kiwis to be vigilant and take necessary steps to keep healthy and safe.
One thing that has changed over time is the Government's messaging around face masks, which is in line with changes from the World Health Organisation. At level 3, Aucklanders are strongly encouraged to wear masks or face coverings in public. For the rest of the country, face coverings are encouraged in situations where physical distancing is not possible, like on public transport. Hand washing and the use of hand sanitiser is also encouraged.
However, there's no push or targeted messaging around gloves. The University of Otago's Lesley Gray says gloves are no replacement for good hand washing and sanitising.
The public health expert and senior lecturer says gloves are great when cleaning or caring for a sick person. "Use disposable gloves and dispose of them appropriately and wash your hands after you take the gloves off."
However, if you are not a health care worker wearing PPE, wearing gloves will not necessarily protect you if you are not regularly washing your hands or using hand sanitiser, she says.
"In fact gloves may give the wearer a false sense of security if touching multiple surfaces [including your face] and not washing hands or hand sanitising."
In non-healthcare settings, the World Health Organisation does not recommend the use of gloves in public spaces as they are not proven as a prevention measure, she says.
WHO states that you can reduce your chances of being infected or spreading Covid-19 by taking simple precautions, such as regularly and thoroughly cleaning your hands.
"Washing your hands with soap and water or using alcohol-based hand rub kills viruses that may be on your hands," its website states.
Its public messaging in March stated that wearing rubber gloves in public was not as effective in preventing infection when compared to regularly washing your hands.
The Ministry of Health website encourages the basic hygiene- related principles, but states that for most non-health related workers, PPE isn't needed for protection from Covid-19. However, PPE may still be advised in workplaces where there is a higher risk of exposure to the virus.
"If you choose to wear a face mask, it is important you put it on and take it off correctly. Similarly, if you choose to wear gloves, you must still practice good hand hygiene. Remember to dispose of any used PPE safely," it states.
The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) states that for the general public, wearing gloves is not necessary in most situations, like running errands.
"CDC recommends wearing gloves when you are cleaning or caring for someone who is sick," its website states.
A study previously found the virus causing Covid-19 survives better on plastic and stainless steel than on copper and cardboard. Although we know more about how Covid-19 can spread now - mostly through person-to-person interaction - possible surface transmission is still a concern.
