WILDLIFE AND CARERS ARE NOW BUBBLE BUDDIES
An unusual lockdown bubble has formed between some native species and those tasked with returning them back to full health.
Otago Polytechnic is normally bustling with students and staff alike, but the campus has been a veritable ghost town over the last week due to Covid-19 alert level 4.
That is apart from the Wildlife Hospital and its current crop of patients: some kaki (black stilt) from Canterbury, several injured kereru, a hoiho from Otago Peninsula, and a kea from the Dunedin Botanic Gardens.
The native species are recovering from a range of injuries and ailments, including an eye injury to the hoiho, and a condition called bumblefoot, a kind of foot infection, for the kaki.
The inpatients are being cared for by two separate bubbles of humans, each including a vet and a nurse.
Having two bubbles meant staff could continue to care for the animals if one bubble became sick or had to self-isolate due to Covid-19, Wildlife Hospital Trust manager Jordana Whyte said.
"We want to avoid that at all costs."
Some patients that had recovered, such as the hoiho, would be returned to their habitat soon using a contactless delivery service involving Penguin Place, a private conservation reserve for yellow-eyed penguins.
Other species may have to wait longer as Department of Conservation staff could not be "out in the field" under the current Covid restrictions.
That also meant fewer patients were arriving at the Dunedin hospital.
"Everyone is at home right now, so nobody is out and about finding those injured animals."
Fewer patients did not necessarily translate to a quieter hospital, Whyte said.
While some animals were quiet, like the hoiho and kereru, the same could not be said for the kea. "They are so loud."
The latest lockdown differed to last year's when the hospital was looking after about 15 penguins, and was struggling to source enough fish to feed them.
"This time our freezer is fully stocked, which is a huge relief," Whyte said. "That is one less thing for us to worry about."
What was more concerning for the trust was the inability to fundraise, so online donations were appreciated, she said.
