‘Narked’ on: Couple found in Wānaka
Revealed: How couple planned lockdown trip
Monday, September 6 was a good day for most New Zealanders living outside of the nation’s most populous city. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern had confirmed that that by the end of the next day the nationwide Covid-19 alert level 4 lockdown would end for all but Aucklanders.
Equestrian and horse breeder William Willis and his partner, lawyer Hannah Rawnsley, appeared to see the announcement as an opportunity for them to cut loose and go to Wānaka as well.
At 3.49pm, just minutes before Ardern’s expected announcement, Willis purchased Jetstar flights from Wellington to Queenstown for that coming Thursday. At 6.03pm, two hours after Ardern outlined the details in a post-Cabinet meeting press conference, the Auckland couple bought separate Air New Zealand tickets for the first leg of the trip, from Hamilton to Queenstown.
Little did they appear to realise that those purchases would set off a “firestorm” of intense media interest and “almost unprecedented public vitriol”.
Court documents obtained by the Herald show what unfolded next. Willis, 35, and Rawnsley, 26, pleaded guilty on Tuesday to failing to comply with an order under the Covid-19 Public Health Response Act, which carries a maximum punishment of six months’ prison and a $4000 fine.
Wellington-based Judge Bruce Davidson, who was called in to oversee the Papakura District Court hearing because of the pair’s ties to the Auckland legal community, convicted Willis and fined him $750.
Willis — the son of Auckland-based district court Judge Mary-Beth Sharp, who at the time was a shareholder in his equestrian business — said it was his idea to take the trip and that Rawnsley was initially reluctant. “But I think you, Ms Rawnsley, quickly gave in to his persistence,” Judge Davidson said during the hearing.
He discharged Rawnsley without conviction, agreeing with defence lawyer Rachael Reed QC that such a mark on her record might unnecessarily destroy the young lawyer’s already “significantly jeopardised” career. The judge ordered her to pay $500 to charity.
Prosecutor Natalie Walker had sought convictions for both as well as sentences of community service.
But the judge ultimately took a softer stance.
“This was far from a case of a deliberate flouting of the rules by someone known to be carrying the virus,” the judge said. “I severely doubt whether either of you gave any serious thought to the consequences of what you did — particularly the media firestorm that erupted.”
At 7.20am on Thursday September 9 — roughly three weeks into the strict lockdown for Auckland — Willis and Rawnsley pulled up to the State Highway 1 Mercer checkpoint at Auckland’s southern border. They were in a Toyota Hilux, with a load of hay in the rear, and had legitimate paperwork allowing them to cross into Waikato to “transport goods related to animal health and welfare”.
Their exemptions explicitly noted, however, that crossing the border for other reasons constituted a criminal offence.
They arrived at a Matangi property near Hamilton at about 8.30am and after unloading the ute, the couple asked the client for a ride to Hamilton Airport and left their vehicle at the property.
In court on Tuesday, the prosecutor suggested the unnecessary hay delivery was simply a ruse so the couple could cross the border.
“In my view there were likely dual purposes at play,” the judge later surmised.
But he didn’t let the couple off the hook, pointing to a statement from Willis that the final decision to go ahead with the holiday was last-minute, after dropping off the hay and learning of the ski conditions in Wānaka. “I find that hard to accept,” the judge said, adding at another point: “Clearly, the trip was planned and pre-meditated. No other conclusion is rationally possible.”
At 8.59am, the couple checked in at Air New Zealand with their luggage. Their flight to Wellington lasted from 10.53am to 12.05pm, and they departed Wellington Airport just over an hour later, arriving at Queenstown at 2.50pm.
They then caught a shuttle to a Jucy rental car facility and left for Wānaka in a hired Suzuki Swift around 4.11pm.
Willis, it was noted by police and later by the judge, showed a level of deception as he filled out paperwork to hire the car, giving a false Waikato home address. Rawnsley paid for the vehicle.
“After visiting a liquor store and going through a fast-food drive through, the defendants drove towards Wānaka, which is approximately one hour’s drive away,” the summary of facts states, noting that during the drive they both received the results of Covid-19 tests they had taken a day earlier.
Upon arriving in Wānaka, they stopped at a grocery store before driving on to the holiday home owned by Willis’ family.
The next day Willis made four purchases “relating to food, drink and recreation”. One of them was to book a ski trip for the following day.
But a tip to the police online portal for reporting Covid-related breaches resulted in Counties Manukau Police visiting Willis’ home address at 9.30 the next morning.
At that point on Saturday morning, Willis was already on his ski outing. Rawnsley remained in town. Shortly after the police drop-in at his Auckland property, Willis made his way back to Wānaka. “They came looking for me at the farm,” he texted to someone only identified in court documents as “an associate”. “Someone has narked.”
By 11.32 that morning, Rawnsley had purchased flights home for the following day. Wānaka police arrived at the holiday home an hour later.
Rawnsley told an officer her partner was out driving around.
“Police waited outside the address for approximately 40 minutes for Mr Willis to return,” court documents state. “However, no car was observed returning to the address in that time. At around 1.05pm, Mr Willis walked from the house with Ms Rawnsley and spoke with police.”
The couple then showed the officer “a series of travel exemptions and Covid-19 test results”, including a letter from the New Zealand Law Society for Rawnsley that was issued to Law Society members to help them cross alert level borders for priority court proceedings.
Walker, the prosecutor, suggested that by volunteering the document Rawnsley was likely to offer the false impression to the police officer that she was in Wānaka for court business. Reed, the defence lawyer, argued her client merely showed one of several documents after she was asked, among other things, what she did for a living, Reed said.
Ultimately, the judge agreed that it wasn’t intended to be deceptive.
The officer left and returned at 4.45pm, instructing the couple to return home and await a court summons for failure to comply with a Covid-19 order.
The following day, Willis and Rawnsley left Queenstown Airport at 2.08pm and arrived in Hamilton, after a stop-over in Christchurch, at 7.50pm. “Yeah bro don’t worry,” Willis texted an “associate” 20 minutes later. “We never signed in and we have said to be low-risk by risk assessment team so they won’t be contact tracing.”
They picked up their ute at the client’s property in Matangi and returned to Auckland at 9.49pm.
That evening, police didn’t name the couple but used them as an example in a press release. Media interest in the case grew when reporters discovered that one was a lawyer and the other was the son of a district judge. Interest in the case reached a fever pitch, after media outlets were notified that the couple had hired a senior lawyer with a prestigious Queen’s Counsel title and that the lawyer was seeking emergency name suppression for the couple — a rare legal manoeuvre when someone hasn’t yet been charged. They also asked a judge to bar media from reporting who Willis’ mother is. The Herald, among other media outlets, hired legal counsel to oppose the proposed restriction. Judge Davidson granted the pair suppression for 24 hours that Monday evening but warned they would have to take it up with the High Court at Auckland if they wanted it to last beyond the following day.
On Tuesday night, with just minutes to go before the deadline to file a request with the High Court or give up the name suppression fight, the couple issued a media statement outing themselves. “We are deeply sorry for our actions and would like to unreservedly apologise to the Wānaka community, and to all the people of Aotearoa New Zealand, for what we did.” At the couple’s first court appearance, on Tuesday, Judge Davidson took into account the apology and the impact of media coverage. While mainstream media seemed to get the facts straight, he said, social media was “out of control”.
“I have to say I’m shocked by its inaccuracy, hostility, anger and vitriol,” he said, pointing to emails to Rawnsley’s employer and Facebook comments that amounted to death threats — provided to the court by the couple’s lawyer. The prosecution had asked that Willis be sentenced to between 100 and 130 hours of community service and that 60 to 80 hours be assigned to Rawnsley.
Their lawyer, however, argued that Willis has been struggling to keep his business afloat and wouldn’t have time to complete community service too. She argued her clients had, at worst, mid-range culpability and had posed little risk due to mask use, social distancing, testing themselves before departure and keeping within their bubble. Appearing before the judge via audio-video feed, Rawnsley wiped tears and Willis dabbed at his eye.
“The gravity of the offending is relatively low,” Judge Davidson said said, adding that the real risk for Rawnsley is her career. “All of these people know what you did.”
