DIGITAL CONNECTION HELPS BEATS LONELINESS
Even before the disruption of Covid- 19 and the level 4 lockdown, Aotearoa's digital divide was a yawning chasm. In the 2018 census, only 86 per cent of households had access to the internet, which meant there were still around 211,000 households without access.
To put it in context, that's the equivalent of slightly less than all the households in the entire Canterbury region without an internet connection.
This was already unacceptable in the 21st century when we rely so much on the internet for work, entertainment, and social connection, but following Covid-19 and the Level 4 lockdown, it has become even more urgent that we close this digital divide.
The fact that during the level 4 lockdown the internet provided many of us with the only means for social interaction beyond our household (and for many of those who live alone, the only interaction at all) highlights just how critical affordable internet access is to meaningful social inclusion.
Census figures show that lack of internet access is correlated with low income. While more households (92 per cent) have access to a mobile phone, it doesn't follow that they can afford data or wi-fi. Participants in a 2018 study of lived experience of digital exclusion talked about "sitting at a payphone, the bus stop, the car" or spending long periods in fast food outlets to access free Wi-fi. A youth worker said "It's all very well having a phone, but ... I know our youth - none of them pay for data."
According to research by economic think tank Motu published in 2017, those least likely to have an internet connection were social housing tenants and disabled people, who are also more likely to report feelings of social exclusion, isolation, and loneliness.
The Helen Clark Foundation together with WSP has this week released a public policy report on the risks of loneliness following Covid-19 and how public policy can help.
One of the most striking findings is how strongly loneliness is correlated with low income and unemployment. The lower your household income, the more likely you were to feel lonely even before the Covid-19 crisis.
Research conducted by the Roy McKenzie Centre for the Study of Families and Children during the lockdown found that up to 30 per cent of people in low income households who then lost employment as a result of the pandemic felt lonely most or all of the time during the lockdown.
By contrast, under more usual circumstances, about 3.5 per cent of the general population report feeling this way.
Covid-19 thrust the issue of loneliness into greater prominence because of the sudden period of enforced isolation we were all required to live through, but it also exposed a significant public health and wellbeing challenge that already existed.
When experienced for a prolonged period, loneliness can shorten life spans, disrupt sleep and hormones, increase risk of developing heart disease, high blood pressure and high cholesterol, and contribute to the development of depression, anxiety, and other mood disorders.
Like so many wellbeing challenges, it disproportionately negatively affects those on low incomes, people who are unemployed, sole parents, young people, Maori, and disabled people.
Closing the digital divide, by considering access to an affordable and accessible internet connection and device as a baseline for social inclusion - even a human right - would help considerably to ease the current risks of widespread loneliness, as well as helping to prepare for the eventuality of future pandemics or further outbreaks of Covid-19 requiring us all to hunker down again.
In practical terms, this could mean making an internet connection a standard provision in all social housing tenancies, and mandating that government-funding services and supports for disabled people include arranging suitable internet access - both recommendations of the Helen Clark Foundation report.
InternetNZ and a coalition of NGOs have also recently released a five-point plan for digital inclusion following Covid- 19 that the government would do well to adopt.
Loneliness is an unmet need for human connection, and ultimately, what works to alleviate it is more frequent and more meaningful social interactions. While governments can't influence our social lives directly - and nor would we want them to - they can create the conditions with good policy that enable social interactions to thrive.
Alongside closing the digital divide, the report recommends making people have enough money, helping communities do their magic, creating friendly streets and neighbourhoods, prioritising those already lonely, and investing in frontline mental health.
The Government has indicated its commitment to wellbeing above all else. If we are serious about improving wellbeing, especially following Covid-19, we need to tackle loneliness head on.
