COURTS OPEN DESPITE LOCKDOWN
As New Zealand faces a lockdown to reduce the spread of coronavirus, courts will stay open but the Chief Justice warns of extreme disruption.
Yesterday, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced the country would be moving to alert level 4 by 11.59pm tomorrow to limit the spread of coronavirus.
"It is essential that New Zealand courts continue to uphold the rule of law and to ensure that fair trial rights, the right to natural justice and rights under the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act are upheld," Chief Justice Helen Winkelmann said last night.
Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, Employment Court, Maori Land Court, Waitangi Tribunal, Coroners Court and most Environment Court hearings would not go ahead this week.
The Chief Justice said hearings in other courts would to the greatest extent possible use remote technologies such as audio-visual links, phone calls and email. Issues involving individual liberty, personal safety and wellbeing, and matters in which resolution was time critical would be priorities, the Chief Justice added.
Before the Chief Justice's announcement, new measures were already being carried out across the courts. Court users nationwide are greeted with signs asking them to stay out if they've been overseas in the last 14 days, are feeling unwell, or are over 70. Hand sanitiser and anti-bacterial wipes have been made available.
At Auckland District Court, Judge Russell Collins was limiting those in a courtroom to the lawyer, defendant, prosecutor and registrars while all other people must wait outside.
In Christchurch District Court, there were signs on every second chair preventing people from sitting right next to each other.
Judge Jane Farish told defendants released on bail they were must leave two contact numbers with the bail counter should things change and the court needed to contact them.
One defendant appearing by audio-visual link was coughing a lot and told the judge she was feeling unwell. Judge Farish ordered the booth cleaned before it could be used again.
In Nelson District Court, only five defendants were allowed in a list court at a time.
Ministry of Justice spokesperson Carl Crafar said it was following the Ministry of Health's guidance on physical distancing.
The ministry ramped up cleaning at courts but asked the public to not attend unless they're a participant or essential support person. An appointment arrangement to limit people at each court is being looked into.
"These are unprecedented times for New Zealand, and we would not be human if we were not worried," the Chief Justice added last night.
