‘Disappointed’ Goff urges city to stick it out
Auckland mayor Phil Goff says he is disappointed level 3 restrictions have been extended but urged residents to stay the course to avoid the “absolute tragedy” happening in Melbourne.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said yesterday that Auckland would stay in the Covid-19 lockdown until 11.59pm on Sunday, and the city and the rest of New Zealand would remain at alert level 2 after that.
The extra four days would allow Auckland to move down a level “and stay down”, Ardern said.
Goff said he was “disappointed”, but believed residents would understand why the decision was made.
“This will be difficult for people whose jobs and businesses are most affected by level 3 restrictions.
“However, the advice given by medical experts is clear; if we ease up on restrictions too early, we risk a further resurgence and losing the benefits we gained from ensuring the virus is contained.”
The extension follows calls from the business community to end the restrictions as soon as possible, as the Auckland Chamber of Commerce reports 20 per cent of businesses fear they might not make it through another extended lockdown.
However, Goff said during a press conference yesterday that while he “really feels for businesses”, the idea of choosing between health or the economy was a “false dichotomy”.
He pointed to cities like Melbourne, which had seen a rapid resurgence in cases with hundreds daily, and a death toll over 400.
It was an example of how the virus could escalate if strong measures were not followed through, and the high death rates and increased economic pain it could cause, he said.
“Melbourne has the worst of both worlds — people dying from the contagion of this disease, and a lockdown even more severe than we are undergoing at the moment. We want to avoid that at all costs.
“We need to stamp out this latest outbreak as quickly as possible so that we are not forced into a worse situation later.”
The present lockdown would have an impact “less severe by far” on the economy than the initial lockdown, Goff said, and he was grateful for Government support of some big projects, including the rail line to Pukekohe. “I will continue working with the Government to make sure those go ahead.”
The Auckland Council had been able to keep its investment in infrastructure at $2.6 billion — $1b more than the average over the past five years. “That’s the part that we can play in stimulating the economy and creating jobs.”
Goff also made a reference to reports of Aucklanders flouting level 3 social distancing guidelines, such as children seen playing at a skate park on the North Shore in recent days.
“When we break the rules, we don’t put just ourselves at risk, we put other, more vulnerable people at risk.”
