CAPITAL CASE NUMBERS EXPECTED TO INCREASE
More cases of Covid-19 infections are expected to be found in the Wellington region over the next few days, as the clock ticks down to the Government's decision on Friday on whether to extend the level 4 lockdown.
But the three new cases announced yesterday were all linked to existing cases, raising hopes that the virus is contained in the capital region, although Covid-19 was again detected at the Moa Point wastewater plant. The number of cases in the capital now stands at 11.
"Yes, we've seen an increase today but reassuringly we're not seeing an exponential growth in case numbers," Director-General of Health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said yesterday.
Deputy Prime Minister Grant Robertson said health authorities expected the outbreak to peak between day 8 and 10 - meaning the worst point could pass as soon as today.
Two Wellington cases were identified on Sunday but were not announced until yesterday. All cases have been transferred to Wellington's dedicated quarantine facility, the Grand Mercure hotel.
It was unclear whether one of the capital's latest cases was a staff member at Victoria University of Wellington. The person had come into close contact with two previously confirmed cases but did not test positive until Friday, when New Zealand was already in level 4 lockdown.
They had previously returned negative tests, so were not infectious at work, vice-chancellor Grant Guilford wrote to students. Because of this, the university was not a location of interest.
Auckland continues to bear the brunt of the outbreak, with another 38 positive cases, taking the total number of cases in Auckland to 137, Bloomfield announced at yesterday's daily update.
Then a person who works in the emergency department at Auckland's Middlemore Hospital was confirmed to have Covid-19 last night.
In the space of just a week, the number of cases in the outbreak is closing in on the country's largest cluster - last year's Auckland August cluster, which saw 179 cases in total.
Bloomfield said the majority of confirmed cases in the outbreak were of Samoan ethnicity, reflecting the fact the largest sub-cluster centres around the Samoan Assembly Of God Church, in Mangere.
There are 58 confirmed cases linked to this church so far. This included both people at the service and close household contacts. Work is still under way to confirm how many people were at the church at the time in question.
The service was "essentially an assembly of assemblies" with 27 different groups in attendance, Bloomfield said. "Well over" 500 people have been tested as part of that cluster.
Bloomfield said he wanted to "sincerely acknowledge" the Samoan and wider Pacific community for their response to the outbreak.
Pacific health expert Dr Colin Tukuitonga, who is leading the health team for the Pacific church cluster, said the large number of cases associated with the church should be expected. He warned against focusing on the ethnicity of cases. "These people will feel discouraged or discriminated against and may not come forward to get tested."
More than 35,500 Covid-19 tests were processed across New Zealand on Monday - more than 26,000 of which were carried out in Auckland.
Regarding the source investigation at the Crowne Plaza managed isolation facility, Bloomfield said officials remained "open-minded" about how the virus got into the community.
