Infection sparks lockdown jitters
Rush to find answers after Northland woman’s positive test
New Zealand faces an anxious wait as health officials scramble to determine whether Covid-19 is again spreading in the community after a Northland woman tested positive for the virus after leaving managed isolation.
The 56-year-old, who lives south of Whangārei, was released from MIQ in Auckland on January 13, developed mild symptoms on January 15 and got tested on January 22 after her condition deteriorated.
She visited 30 southern Northland locations, including cafes, restaurants, retail outlets, tourist attractions and holiday hotspot Mangawhai.
It is New Zealand’s first reported community case since November and has sparked a rush to identify how the woman got infected, and whether the virus has spread further. She is now in isolation at home with her husband, who has also been tested and is awaiting results.
Covid-19 Minister Chris Hipkins said it was still too early to say whether any restrictions or alert level changes would be needed, or how the woman got the virus.
“We don’t have the relevant information we need to make any further decisions on that. As soon as we do we will keep people informed,” he said yesterday.
He said anybody who had symptoms should get a test, wherever they were in New Zealand.
Director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said the woman had only four close contacts, who were now isolating for 14 days.
However, she had been to about 30 different places while she was potentially infectious — including in Mangawhai, Dargaville and down to Helensville as well as Whangarei.
Anybody who had been at the same businesses at the relevant time period was asked to isolate, call Healthline and get a Covid-19 test.
The low number of close contacts has Covid-19 experts optimistic that a lockdown will be avoided — but saying the test results of those contacts could be critical.
Covid-19 modeller Professor Shaun Hendy said: “Going forward, it will be important to determine whether the person acquired the case in managed isolation and quarantine [MIQ], as this might mean there are other returnees who could have been exposed and officials will want to tighten any procedures that could have led to exposure.”
The names of the businesses the woman visited went on the Ministry of Health website but only after the businesses were advised of the contact, prompting criticism given many people returned from holiday in the past week. The list was released about 9 o’clock last night.
National’s health spokesperson and Whangarei-based list MP, Shane Reti, said there was disbelief among the community and he was disappointed the 30 sites were not revealed immediately.
“In matters of urgency like this and on a weekend — you are not going to maybe get people until Monday in their business hours — I think urgency trumps some of the other concerns.”
Mangawhai is a popular holiday spot for Aucklanders and many could have left the area to return to work in the past week.
Extra testing stations will be set up in Northland, especially around Mangawhai.
The woman had used the Covid app, and others who had scanned or had bluetooth activated would be alerted.
The woman’s case also sparked concern about potential transmission in the MIQ facility.
The woman had stayed at the Pullman Hotel in Auckland for her isolation period until January 13, and the Covid-19 team were scanning CCTV footage to check for any possible instances of infection transmission. Genomic sequencing was taking place to see if it was the same as any other cases from the Pullman.
Bloomfield said until that was known, they were acting on the assumption it was one of the fast-spreading UK or South African variants. About a dozen others at the Pullman in Auckland had tested positive for Covid-19 during the woman’s stay and several had those variants.
Covid-19 modeller Professor Michael Plank said the case was different from the August Auckland cluster, given authorities were dealing with just one case with a probable link to the border — rather than several with no connection.
“But it’s a little bit of a waiting to game to get the results from testing of close contacts — that’s the key thing at this stage — and once we get those test results, we’ll know whether it’s spread more widely.”
The woman left the Pullman on January 13 and told health officials she got very mild symptoms, such as muscle aches, on January 15 but did not associate them with Covid-19 until they worsened.
She got tested on January 22, and the positive result came through the next night.
The woman had returned from a work trip for about four months in Spain, and visited family in the Netherlands on the way back. She returned via London where she stayed in an airport hotel, and transited through Singapore.
A Ministry of Health spokesman said the Northland District Health Board Medical Officer of Health decided isolating at home was appropriate for the woman and her husband in their case.
“The situation will be monitored closely to ensure there is no public health risk.”
Hipkins said all staff at the Pullman staff who had not had a test in the last few days were being tested.
About 600 others who had stayed there in the same period were also being asked to isolate and get tests.
