Study: Covid response led to dramatic drop in deaths
Covid-19 threatened to kill thousands of Kiwis last year — instead, New Zealand’s death rate finished up among its lowest in recent times.
A new study has shown how a marked drop in deaths which came with level 4 restrictions was followed by historically low rates well beyond lockdown.
The Medical Research Institute of New Zealand-led (MRINZ) analysis, published in major journal The Lancet this month, explored trends for 2020 death rates as far as mid-October.
It found lower rates that came after a sharp drop triggered by lockdown carried on through for nearly 30 weeks after.
“With a hard and fast approach to eliminating Covid-19, we were interested to find out what effect it might have had on overall mortality rates,” lead author Dr Stacey Kung said.
Using mortality data from Stats NZ Tatauranga Aotearoa, the researchers compared the number of weekly deaths in 2020 with the average weekly deaths during the 2015-2019 and 2011-2019 periods.
The year got off to a typical start, hovering close to 120 weekly deaths per million, before the trendline took a sharp turn around late April, five weeks after New Zealand moved to level 4.
Over the 29 weeks after the start of lockdown, the mean death rate was 11 per cent lower than the same period between 2015 and 19 — or 123 weekly deaths per million, compared with 138 deaths per million.
The drop across all causes of mortality became especially clear after five weeks of lockdown, and stayed low despite public health intervention measures easing, and in a period where seasonal flu and pneumonia usually drove an increase.
“The continued decrease in weekly all-cause mortality ... is striking,” Kung said. “It would be reasonable to expect that as life returned to normal, the weekly death rate would go back up to historical levels.”
Other studies have pointed to the fact that only 500 cases of influenza were detected up to September 27 — 474 of them before lockdown.
“Adhering to good hygiene practices evidently helps to reduce not only the transmission of Covid-19, but also helps to reduce the transmission of the flu — with very few influenza hospitalisations reported last year,” Kung said.
More than 200,000 New Zealanders catch the flu each year, and an estimated at least 500 people die from it.
That accounted for 2 per cent of all deaths, and was more than the annual road toll — which last year proved to be lower, too.
Kung stressed it was still too early to say conclusively what the wider consequences of New Zealand’s public health measures were — but it was clear it delivered strong results.
