CORPORAL Marcia Cooper
After 29 years living as a different person, Corporal Marcia Cooper isn't too worried about the Covid-19 lockdown interrupting some of her transition timeline.
Marcia started her transition from a man to a woman in July 2019 after 11 years in the air force.
Prior to lockdown she was starting to get her legal paperwork sorted, getting fitted for a female air force uniform and starting to prepare to tell her work colleagues.
But while some of these things were delayed, like most things to do with her transition, Marcia is just excited for the day it finally happens.
To get to where she is today Marcia says she first had to realise it wasn't normal to wish you were the opposite gender.
Then it got to a point where she not only wanted to change it, but needed to change it.
Marcia, now 30, says the main thing that had her thinking about her gender was her love of computer games.
Whenever she had to design a character, she was always drawn to the women.
After talking to her psychologist, who she was already seeing as she suffered from depression, the pieces fell into place and she started to transition.
One of the first things Marcia did was approach OverWatch.
"It did make me nervous."
But once she had, she found out she was not the first transgender person in the air force and there were also guidelines in place.
After making the decision to transition, she told her commander.
"I got nothing but support."
She then told her colleagues, like a lot of people during lockdown, via a Zoom call.
"I did a presentation of telling my journey and I have had nothing but support, everyone has been amazing.
"I'm the happiest I've ever been."
Marcia was sized up for a female uniform in January, so she left the air force pre-lockdown in a male uniform and returned with a female one, which she has worn once on base for a squadron medal ceremony.
Since starting her hormone replacement therapy she has noticed her overall strength dropping.
The hormone therapy has also helped with fat redistribution, with fat heading to her belly, hips and thighs.
Even though she is transitioning, she says she still had a lot of the same hobbies and likes all the same things.
"I'm still a Star Wars fan and they still call me Coops."
She likes to think the people she initially joined the air force with would have accepted her if she shared the news back then, but it was more the commanding officer and greater air force perspectives she was worried about.
"With society in general 20-30 years ago it was almost unheard of.
"Society is moving forward and the fact the Defence Force have put emphasis on it means it's going in the right direction."
She says she will probably go for the full gender reassignment surgery, but that will be a waiting game.
"New Zealand doesn't have anyone to provide [gender reassignment surgery] at this stage.
"There is a surgeon who can do it, but they are currently not offering it."
Her other options are to save up enough to get the surgery done in Australia, especially if New Zealand borders open earlier to them, rather than Thailand.
"It took me 30 odd years to realise, what's waiting a couple more years?"
