Screen bingeing bad news
Optometrists are warning excessive screen time during the Covid-19 lockdown has caused a rise in the number of Kiwis seeking help for eye strain.
One Auckland optometrist said that before lockdown about 20 per cent of people who had eye tests complained of digital eye strain, caused by prolonged use of electronic screens.
Now the figure was 60 per cent.
Karthigan Param said his biggest concern was the impact it could have on a person’s quality of life — especially on a child’s development.
Digital eye strain can cause dry or irritated eyes, lead to blurred vision, difficulty focusing, sensitivity to light, eye fatigue, headaches and problems reading small print.
Briar Barratt-Boyes, 24, told the Herald of getting “burning eyes” during lockdown.
At the office before lockdown, she spent about six hours a day in front of a computer and had lots of breaks.
“During lockdown, I was doing at least nine hours a day screen time and when it got really busy in the middle of lockdown I was spending about 10-11 hours straight glued to the computer,” Barratt-Boyes said.
“When I was working from home all my meetings were over Zoom so I was literally glued to the computer the whole time.”
Param said this was the case for many. “If you’re going from remote working or studying to a Zoom hangout with friends or family, to a marathon session of Netflix, your overall time spent in front of a screen may add up to 10 hours or more a day.
“Our eyes aren’t meant to be fixed on a single object that long and it’s likely to have a negative effect on our eye health.”
He cautioned that increased time on digital devices and near work with screens was even more concerning for children than adults.
“Vision and eye health can have a major impact on a child’s development — not just on their education but on sports and social interactions as well.”
Staring at screens and being indoors for extended periods could increase the risk of a child becoming short-sighted (myopic), meaning their eyes focus well on close objects, while more distant objects appear blurred.
Research commissioned by Specsavers before Covid-19 restrictions came into effect found a majority of New Zealand office workers had symptoms of digital eye strain.
Of the 1167 people surveyed, it showed eight out of 10 claimed to have experienced at least one symptom at work. The most common symptoms were neck, shoulder and back soreness.
Relieving eye strain can be as simple as blinking frequently, drinking plenty of water, taking regular breaks, reducing glare and checking your posture.
