OPPORTUNITY AND NEWFOUND FAME Lockdown, one year on
On March 25, 2020, at 11.59pm, New Zealand went into lockdown in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. During our 33 days of self-isolation, Stuff profiled many people making the most of an unprecedented situation. One year on, we catch up with some of them.
--------------------
Over four nights during last year's nationwide lockdown, Jack Buchanan made his family dance around their home on camera on their staircase, in their living room and through their hallways.
Little did the actor and musician realise at the time, but the resulting video - Family Lockdown Boogie - would make him, briefly, an online star and open up new work opportunities even as his industry was turned upside down.
"It's been an up and down year for me," Buchanan says, adding that the initial lockdown announcement was a major blow to him personally, as both a working performer and artist.
"I instantly lost about three to four months' work in the space of 12 hours."
For Buchanan, newfound internet fame was surprising, given he'd been creating other content prior to Family Lockdown Boogie. The video ended up amassing more than 3.6 million views on YouTube and was shared thousands of times on social media.
After the boogie video, Buchanan created about five more short videos last year, although none with the breakaway success of the original.
But other opportunities have also come up: Buchanan was asked to work for the Electoral Commission to help promote how the MMP system worked ahead of the election, and he was offered a partnership with supermarket chain New World.
"It's all sorts of work I'd never anticipated I'd have as a result of the silly s... I did."
Buchanan said he felt at home on the stage. He spent more than a year not involved in theatre because of the pandemic, but eventually a chance arose to be part of Circa Theatre's annual Christmas pantomime. The performance of his character, Prince Ashley of Bloomingfields, received rave reviews.
One year on from the lockdown, Buchanan said life was still pretty weird. He's moved back to Auckland, and has been in and out of recent yo-yoing alert level changes, meaning more jobs getting postponements or cancelled.
He's about to embark on a 10-week tour of Australia with a theatre company, which was meant to go ahead last year but was also pushed out because of the pandemic. Whether Buchanan will be able to make it over or not is still uncertain. But he said the lockdown has made him better at planning for worst-case scenarios.
Last year when the call was made to enter lockdown, Buchanan pondered retraining for a different career.
Since Family Lockdown Boogie, he had been thinking about pivoting into different fields, including directing and film-making. But it's a different kind of thinking. "It's a constant reassessing of what the future might be day by day," he says. "The events of last year made me consider my skill-set in a more holistic way, and look at other opportunities aside from acting.
"So much could go wrong. But I suppose you can only control what you can control. Trying to control anything other than yourself will just cause you stress and heartache."
