TWO BARS CLOSED BY POLICE
Two venue closures and an assault that put two people in hospital marred the first weekend of bars reopening following the coronavirus lockdown.
Bars across the country were able to open again from Thursday - albeit under tight restrictions - giving punters their first chance to hit the pubs since lockdown began more than eight weeks ago.
In central Wellington, at least two incidents blemished the return to late-night venues, including a serious assault that resulted in the arrest of a 27-year-old man.
"Early on Friday morning, there was an incident on Courtenay Place that resulted in at least two people with facial injuries being admitted to hospital," a police spokeswoman said.
The man was charged with two counts of assault with intent to injure, and will appear in Wellington District Court on June 15.
A police spokeswoman said there were also "a couple" of reports of disorder in the capital, including a scuffle on Dixon St at 12.20am yesterday.
Stuff witnessed a late-night fight at the intersection of Taranaki St and Courtenay Place that left a man unconscious on the ground. The incident was not reported to police.
Courtenay Place was closed to traffic overnight Friday and Saturday to help with physical distancing requirements, and police had an increased presence around central city bars.
"Unfortunately, assaults in our cities during the wee hours do happen from time to time when there are people who are out and about," police said.
There were no reported breaches of coronavirus restrictions in the capital, but two bars were forced to close in Auckland for not complying with regulations.
Police assistant commissioner Scott Fraser would not name the bars, but said they were in Auckland City and Counties Manukau.
"[They] were found to not be complying with restrictions overnight, and did not respond to education or encouragement to comply. As such, those premises were shut down for the night," Fraser said.
Hummingbird and Siglo co- owner Jordan Mills said custom in Wellington was "reasonably good", but there were definitely fewer people out.
"I think people are either apprehensive about going out or put off by knowing they have to book."
Siglo normally held up to 350 people at a time, but on Saturday night it had to keep that to under 100.
The Glass Goose Bar and Eatery, on Auckland's Federal St, said business was also good.
