VICTORIA PREPARES FOR STUDENT HALL LOCK-IN
Victoria University students are being moved to one place as it closes and prepares for the coronavirus lockdown.
Meanwhile, some students have seen their classes cut completely, but others are expected to work through - even while preparing for lockdown.
University hall residents, who are mostly in their first weeks away from home, are being told to get home before tonight - or be locked in to the halls.
"If you cannot return home, please speak to your head of hall immediately.
"We will be providing you with alternative accommodation at Weir House with full catering," the message from Student and Campus living director Rainsforth Dix said.
"Please prepare what you need to take for the next four weeks as we will be consolidating all remaining residents in the one hall on Thursday."
All accommodation contracts would be suspended from today.
The university would "look after you all, and provide a high level of care for your health and wellbeing".
Since last week, students had been demanding more clarity from the university about its coronavirus plan.
Geo Robrigado, president of the Victoria University of Wellington Students' Association, said it was "extremely disappointed" with the response to the pandemic, including lack of information and no way to study remotely.
Those concerns came after Massey University, the University of Auckland and University of Otago earlier announced moves to shift their education services remotely where possible.
Until this week there had been no clear assurances from Victoria as to whether it was ready to do the same.
A third-year medical student at the University of Auckland said amid all the chaos they were expected to continue with lectures and tests as usual but online.
"Many, myself included, have nowhere to study at home and no libraries to go to now."
A University of Auckland spokeswoman said the "no teaching week" was designed for academics to work out how best they could adjust.
"It was not to give students a break; hence student services, libraries etc remained open."
Programmes for second, third, fourth and fifth-year students would be delivered online during the lockdown.
A student from Victoria University said they were being left with no remote learning after weeks of preparation to do so.
Instead, classes had been "suspended" until late April.
Axing classes was the loss of one stability from their lives, leaving students to dwell on their worries.
Otago University student Georgina Hassell-Hopkinson said the lockdown announcement had caught her off-guard.
"The announcement and subsequent sell-out of all flights and ferry tickets has left me and many others stranded."
Her mother was a head nurse at Wellington Hospital and, because Hassell-Hopkinson could not make it back, her little brother could be left at home alone.
"My worst fear which is looking to be the most realistic is that my mother will catch Covid-19 and then pass it on to my brother, and who will look after them then?"
