DEADLINE EXTENDED
People hoping to get domestic flights home on Air New Zealand this week are unsure if their flight will run and say they can't contact anyone to find out.
The deadline for domestic travel has been extended to Friday. Originally, it came into place at the same time as the level four coronavirus lockdown - today at 11.59pm.
But huge demand has meant that the Government has pushed out the timeframe, Transport Minister Phil Twyford said. "The Government recognises New Zealanders are trying to do the right thing by returning home ahead of the country moving to level four."
After Friday, the only internal flights available will be for freight or people working in essential services. Overseas visitors and tourists will be able to use domestic air travel to get to an international airport to fly home. Others will not be able to fly.
At a media briefing yesterday, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern acknowledged getting people home via domestic ferries and flights had been "stressful" but asked for patience.
"We gave 48 hours to really start closing things down in terms of that unnecessary travel. But we accept, we've got to let people back to their place of residence. We'll work through that backlog so I do just ask for people's patience and to be calm."
Later yesterday, Twyford announced the deadline extension. Domestic passenger services, particularly ferries, had been inundated with people trying to get home before the cut-off date, he said.
A decrease in passenger numbers to accommodate physical distancing had reduced capacity and Twyford said it was unlikely the increased demand could be met before midnight tonight.
The Government had "agreed to extend the deadline for non-essential workers and international tourists to keep using domestic passenger services until midnight Friday," he said.
"After this time, services will only be provided to essential services and workers, including freight services.
"International travellers will only be allowed to use domestic passenger services to reach their final destination to comply with lock-down requirements."
The Government is warning travellers not to go to airports unless they have a ticket. Instead, travellers should contact a travel agent or airline directly, or contact their country's embassy.
A spokesperson for Air New Zealand said the airline was increasing capacity on domestic services over the next two days to help people get home before the lockdown.
This includes a mix of extra flights and swapping smaller planes for larger ones. Details can be found on the Travel Alerts page on the Air new Zealand website.
The airline asks travellers cancelling a flight booked in the next 48 hours to inform them online so seats can be freed up for others, and tells those needing a credit or refund to call them only after March 31.
"We are wanting to ensure that our phone lines and social media channels are best placed to assist customers urgently needing to travel."
Foreign Affairs Minister Winston Peters encouraged the tens of thousands of New Zealanders travelling abroad to now consider sheltering in place, in light of Covid-19.
Last week Peters said more than 80,000 Kiwis could be left stranded if they did not come home immediately as commercial flights started to dry up.
There were about 17,000 registered travellers and others who were making contact, he said. It had become very difficult to return to New Zealand from all around the world, Peters said.
"Many of the hubs we usually rely on to get home are no longer available, as countries such as Singapore prevent transits by foreign nationals through their airports."
Meanwhile, the Government is looking into putting Kiwis into quarantine when they return from overseas.
Ardern said tightening the rules was her current focus. She planned to making an announcement on quarantine measures in the coming days.
Returning Kiwis continued to be a risk in New Zealand but they had to be allowed to return home, she said. "But we also have to manage this risk. I have asked our team to expedite the work on managing that risk in a way that will be seen as much harsher than currently because that is what is required."
She confirmed the Government was working through options that could see people sent on buses to hotels.
The option would be based on the scale of the ongoing return of Kiwis, she said.
"We are working hard to try and anticipate the numbers that we will be dealing with and build around that. It is not a small task," she said.
