WE NEED AN OPPOSITION NOW MORE THAN EVER
It was a good week for Paul Goldsmith - quite an achievement when you think last week was one most of us would rather forget.
Not only was the Auckland-based MP and finance spokesman for National dubbed the sexiest MP in Parliament by Metro writer Max Tweedie (expect to see more such lists as the lockdown drags on), but he was rightly praised for raising valid concerns about the size of the Government's $12.1 billion coronavirus stimulus package. The headline figure was big, but labelling the package as a Covid- 19 stimulus was a decision that deserved further scrutiny.
Two significant parts of the package - an increase in benefit levels and changes to tax rules - weren't really economic stimulus in the way they had been billed.
Although they were both significant parts of the package, costing $2.4b and $2.1b respectively, their cost was calculated over the standard four-year budget period. Goldsmith said the initiatives were "worthy", but struggling businesses needed a serious cash injection in the next month, not in four years' time.
His second point was that the scheme's centrepiece, a $5.1b wage subsidy, was flawed in that each business could claim only a maximum of $150,000 over the next three months. That's fine if you're a small business, but such is the impact of Covid-19 that large businesses, which employ a substantial portion of the workforce, will need help too.
The Government eventually lifted the cap, raising the estimated cost of the scheme to $9.3b when it put the country into lockdown.
Goldsmith wasn't the only member of the National front bench with a strong critique. Health spokesman Michael Woodhouse was an early critic of the Government's testing regime, arguing it should look to model countries like South Korea, where widespread testing has been credited with stopping the country slipping into an Italian-style epidemic.
No-one envies the job of an Opposition in a crisis. It's ultimately unrewarding: the Opposition succeeds by helping the Government work properly. Where it succeeds, it's unlikely to get much credit.
Tone is important. The relish and delight National took in dismantling the Government's KiwiBuild policy would be inappropriate here, but if the Covid-19 response starts going the way of KiwiBuild, the Opposition has a duty to expose it. Simon Bridges' own speech on the stimulus package was roundly criticised for getting the tone wrong - a valid point; his zeal was inappropriate under the circumstances - but the critique shouldn't be stretched too far. He is doing a vital job, and it's about to become a whole lot more important.
As New Zealand enters effective lockdown, it will become something close to a police state, with basic freedoms severely restricted. The lockdown is absolutely necessary and warranted, but any Government wielding such profound powers must do so with scrutiny.
The only thing that distinguishes New Zealand from being something like a real police state is the fact there will still be an Opposition.
Let's not forget that it was the lack of a functional Opposition and real dissent that probably led to the global Covid-19 catastrophe in the first place. While governments and groups like the World Health Organisation praised China's response to the crisis, there's been far too little criticism of the country's botched and dishonest response to the initial outbreak.
Early cases appeared in Wuhan as early as November and, by early December, doctors knew they had a crisis on their hands. Yet China would not confirm the outbreak of the virus until December 31.
Dr Li Wenliang, of Wuhan, raised the alarm in early December, but was officially reprimanded for "spreading false rumours". He later died from the virus and was just this week posthumously exonerated for speaking out.
When the truth could be suppressed no longer, China was more than willing to talk about Covid-19. In February, with thousands still yet to die, China was ready to declare victory. China didn't act quickly; quite the opposite. It denied there was human-to-human transmission until January 21, long after it became clear there was a crisis.
Authorities let five million people leave Wuhan before imposing lockdown, a catastrophic decision that has endangered the lives of millions around the world. An effective Opposition should be asking serious questions of the Chinese administration. Sadly, those questions will forever go unanswered.
China may teach New Zealand how to respond effectively to an outbreak, but we shouldn't forget it was China's model of quashing dissent that plunged the world into this crisis.
It may seem counterintuitive to preach the gospel of dissent and disunity at this time, but when the Government makes more monumental decisions in three days than it usually would in three years, opposition is essential.
