Ministry spells out essential stores YES NO
The Warehouse and most liquor stores will close when Covid-19 alert level 4 begins late tonight, Government ministers have confirmed.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment said ministers met last night to clarify what essential services will remain open during the nationwide lockdown.
New Zealand will enter alert level 4 at 11.59pm in an effort to “stop the virus in its tracks,” said the ministry’s deputy chief executive, Paul Stocks.
“That’s why we need as many businesses as possible to close their premises now if our one shot at beating the virus is to be successful.
“Only the businesses absolutely essential to ensure the necessities of life, like supermarkets and pharmacies, can stay open. If in doubt, the business premises should be closed.”
That means all Warehouse stores need to shut up shop for the next four weeks at least. “Leaving them open to the general public creates too high a risk of further spreading the virus.”
Dairies can stay open, as they sell basic food items like milk and bread to those that live nearby, especially for the elderly who may struggle to get to a supermarket, he said.
“However, they will need to operate a strict ‘one-in one-out’ policy and they won’t be allowed to sell food prepared on the premises.
“If any dairy breaks the rules, we will shut it down. If there is evidence of systemic abuse, we will remove them from the essential services list.”
Liquor stores must close, unless they are within a Licensing Trust Area, such as in West Auckland and Invercargill. These must operate with “one-in one-out“rule.
Food delivery services such as Uber Eats and Delivery Easy are a no-go, because they “pose a risk to human health”. Only the Red Cross Meals on Wheels service is exempt.
“We cannot guarantee every kitchen operates strict food preparation controls or that everyone who works in a kitchen is well,” Stocks said.
“For clarity, every restaurant, cafe and bar must close all aspects of their operation, including delivery.” Delivery of non-precooked food is allowed, but only under strict conditions.
“We are doing further work on online ordering of non-food products for home delivery to see if this type of retail can be conducted safely.
“We will update advice on this once further decisions are made.”
Hardware stores Bunnings, Placemakers and Mitre 10 can stay open to trade customers for essential purposes only — that means helping out in the construction supply chain, not for the general public.
Businesses that are a critical part of the supply chain for essential services are also able to continue operating, but must do so in a way that is safe, Stocks said.
“For example, if you make chemicals that are needed for our waste water plants, then we need you to keep operating at the minimum level required.”
Stocks reiterated that level 4 is not business as usual and will involve “significant restrictions on what New Zealanders are able to purchase”.
“However, these changes are essential to stop the spread ... We are ready to change the list if necessary.
“If ... there are essential services that have not been made available we will react to that as we go.”
