COVID VAX RATES 'SILVER LINING' OF Auckland's 100 days of lockdown
New Zealand had gone nearly six months without a community Covid-19 case when an Auckland man tested positive with the Delta variant on August 17, sparking what has now been 100 days in lockdown. But a lot has been achieved in that time, Hannah Martin reports.
In the 14 weeks it has been in lockdown, Auckland has emerged as potentially one of the most vaccinated cities in the world.
When Case A was discovered in mid-August, just 24.9 per cent of Aucklanders over 12 were fully vaccinated, and 41.7 per cent had received their first dose of the Pfizer vaccine.
On November 25, as Auckland marks 100 days in lockdown and 6939 cases later, nearly 87 per cent of eligible residents are fully vaccinated. Ninety-three per cent have had their first dose.
Last week, the Auckland DHB became the first in the country to have 90 per cent of its eligible population fully vaccinated. Modelling indicates that the region's other two health boards are just weeks away from doing the same.
It has taken a tremendous amount of work to get to this point, particularly given the size of Auckland's population compared with the rest of the country. But it has also brought to the fore the health inequities facing Tamaki Makaurau's most vulnerable communities.
When Delta emerged in Auckland, the country was making progress with its vaccination programme, but there wasn't a huge rush.
More than 2.55 million doses of the Pfizer vaccine had been given across New Zealand as of August 17, and 934,000 people were fully vaccinated. Vaccination had widened to group 4 (non-border and health workers without underlying conditions) but invitations had only just opened early to those aged over 50.
The outbreak saw things shift significantly.
Today, more than 7.3 million doses have been administered across Aotearoa. More doses have been administered in Auckland alone than had been done nationwide when the virus reared its head in the community again.
On August 18, just 16.8 per cent of Maori in Tamaki Makaurau were fully vaccinated, and 27.7 per cent had received their first dose.
Fourteen weeks on, more than four times as many Maori in the region are fully vaccinated (70.9 per cent), and 83.7 per cent have had their first dose.
Rates for Pacific Aucklanders have also jumped. On August 18, 33.1 per cent had received their first dose, and 20.6 per cent were fully vaccinated. Now, 88 per cent have had one, and 78 per cent have had both.
Awerangi Tamihere, chief operating officer at Te Whanau o Waipareira Trust - a social support service in West Auckland - said the organisation always knew that it would take longer to reach Maori and West Auckland communities.
Waipareira operates the Henderson vaccination centre and set up the Trusts Arena drive- through, where up to 1700 doses were given per day at the peak. A "huge" 124,100 vaccines had been given across Waipareira sites as of Friday.
Tamihere said that while the initial booking system model worked well for "90 per cent" of Kiwis, it wasn't getting Maori in the door to be vaccinated.
Part of that was to do with the "politics of poverty": if a whanau was worried about putting food on the table, getting vaccinated became a lesser priority, even if they had every intention of doing so, she said. "Until our people are vaccinated, we will have a lot of issues."
Every day, Waipareira sends mobile vaccination teams street by street around targeted West Auckland suburbs to offer people the chance to be vaccinated where they are.
It's an approach Waipareira has recently taken north, with 70 staff driving around gravel roads in the "middle of nowhere" in the Far North, Hokianga and Whangarei, delivering 3000 vaccines last week to mostly Maori.
They also provide food vouchers and hygiene packs, and deliver food to whanau in need as part of their Covid response.
Tamihere said Waipareira would continue going "really hard" in the coming months to push vaccination rates for Maori.
"We have to go as hard as we can. We can't let up."
The number of Maori in West Auckland testing positive for Covid- 19 - Waipareira has had to reduce its mobile vaccination teams to move staff to support those isolating at home - was "just not right", she said.
"This is the reality of where we're at . . . we have work to do".
Since the Delta outbreak began in August, New Zealand has recorded 15 new Covid-19 deaths, bringing the overall Covid-19 toll to 40. Three of those who died were people isolating at home with the virus.
Even amid the country's worst Covid outbreak, New Zealand has still fared better than most, with just 31 other (many much smaller) jurisdictions worldwide seeing fewer deaths, including two cruise ships, BBC data shows.
Ireland, with roughly the same population size, has seen more than 5600 deaths following an outbreak in early 2021 which Bloomberg described as "the world's worst".
Dr Sarah Hartnall, Northern Region Health Coordination Centre clinical operations lead, said that looking back at the past 14 weeks, "it is amazing what happens when you light a fire".
When Delta arrived, vaccination had been running for almost six months, and Auckland's roll-out was broadly "on track" with what was expected. However, authorities were "perhaps not quite as happy with the rates as they could have been, particularly for Maori and Pacific [communities]".
The outbreak saw a "very very pressured" few weeks, Hartnall said. Demand for vaccination surged as vaccine eligibility widened - the floodgates opened.
Campervans and buses were sent out to get jabs into arms, taxis were funded to get people to clinics, and vaccines were taken into emergency housing, food banks, and people's homes.
The "ultimate focus" remained getting first doses to Maori and Pacific communities, Hartnall said.
"We still have to work to do, but it's pretty awesome where we are right now."
In marking 100 days in lockdown, Hartnall said the sacrifices and struggles of Aucklanders had made all of those gains possible.
"[Through] all the hard work you've done, look at what we've been able to achieve.
"That's definitely the silver lining out of where we find ourselves."
