Team of 5m:‘We’re over it’
Numbers seeking help rise after move to higher alert levels
People are feeling more anxious and angry during the second Covid-19 lockdown than at any other time since the pandemic started.
The sense of community felt during the first lockdown in March appears to have dissipated amid growing frustration and despair, research suggests. The number of people encouraging others to comply with lockdown rules, by sharing messages such as #stayhomesavelives, has dived by more than 50 per cent, analysis shows.
Some mental-health experts are reporting an increase in the numbers accessing online services or seeking help as the stress of the move into higher alert levels takes its toll.
Business consultancy Rutherford analysed about 435,318 posts on Facebook, Twitter, Reddit and Instagram in the past two weeks to get a snapshot of how Kiwis felt.
Encouraging messages for New Zealand’s “team of 5 million” had been replaced with complacency and people feeling “over it”. Rutherford head of insights and experimentation Dr Gregg Franco said there appeared to be more ambivalence and fewer people bandying together hashtags such as #stayhomesavelives.
Instead, people were either taking the fight or flight approach where they were angry about the situation or believed they wouldn’t catch the virus so carried on as normal.
Auckland is in level 3 lockdown after a new outbreak was detected more than two weeks ago following more than 100 days without community transmission.
On Monday, Jacinda Ardern extended the lockdown until 11.59pm on Sunday, when Auckland will join the rest of the country at level 2.
Rutherford chief executive Graham Ritchie said not only had the volume of social-media conversation about Covid-19 increased, but negative sentiment was up 10 per cent. It was also more heightened and toxic as people vented frustration at further restrictions. There had been a 7 per cent increase in sadness and 8 per cent drop in optimism.
Ritchie said people were becoming more critical and an undercurrent of electioneering was fuelling that.
This week Ardern acknowledged the second round of level 3 had been tough for some and a reminder Covid-19 was ever-present in the world: “It is a hard reality to accept.”
She also sought to reassure people that New Zealand wouldn’t necessarily go into lockdown every time a new cluster emerged but the tail of the latest cluster would be long.
Victoria University of Wellington clinical psychologist Dr Dougal Sutherland said the increased negativity could be due to disappointment that we hadn’t beaten Covid-19 as first thought. People often got irritable and looked for someone to blame and this was probably exasperated by the fact it was election year and politicians were trying to hold people to account.
Sutherland also said the best way of dealing with anxiety was to find tools to cope with it instead of being reassured everything would be okay.
“You can’t control Covid, you can’t control whether Covid is in the community ... but you can control whether you wear a face mask and practise good hygiene and practise social distancing. And that ability to actively cope if you’re feeling worried is much more beneficial than people being reassured.”
Mental-health advocacy group Changing Minds chief executive Taimi Allan said the heightened anxiety in this lockdown differed from the first when people were panicked and worrying they weren’t prepared.
“We have kind of lost our innocence a little bit in the second lockdown.”
People were experiencing a fear of the unknown and were anxious about the future. This was normal.
Auckland hypnotherapist Richard Kellow had seen a rise in inquiries from people anxious about the alert levels. People felt lonely and there was a sense of failure, lack of security and uncertainty.
Anxiety New Zealand chief executive Sarah Woollard encouraged people to focus on daily activities to keep well, such as chatting to a friend or going for a walk: “It’s totally normal to be a bit worried and a bit uncertain because there’s a lot going on.”
Overall, there was also more negativity about the country’s economic future compared to when the last analysis was carried out in April.
