SPIKE IN TESTS FOR COVID-19
Queues at Covid-19 testing centres in the Wellington region have grown longer than during lockdown, as people seek to be checked following new cases at the border.
The 11 new active cases may have caused panic among the community, despite Health Minister David Clark confirming there was no evidence of community transmission.
The Ministry of Health yesterday changed the rules for people seeking Covid-19 tests.
The "suspect" case definition has been removed, meaning greater priority will be given to those considered to have a higher risk of having the virus.
The ministry denied the change would make it more difficult for others to get a test, saying instead that it allows those at higher risk to be managed better.
From yesterday, people with respiratory symptoms who have had contact with a confirmed or probable case, have recently arrived from overseas, or had direct contact with an international traveller in the last 14 days will be given priority.
Those deemed to be lower risk - who don't meet the new criteria - may still be tested but don't necessarily need to self-isolate while awaiting results.
Director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield insisted the amended definition would not make it harder to get tested.
Bloomfield said the bar is still set at whether someone has respiratory symptoms.
The criteria changed after testing demand surged following confirmation of two cases on June 16, which put an end to the country's 24-day case-free streak.
The day the cases were announced, testing increased by 136 per cent, compared to the day prior. Testing rates continued to rise over the week and reached a record high yesterday, with 10,436 tests being completed.
Testing rates for Community Based Assessment Centres (CBACs) in the Capital & Coast District Health Board and Hutt Valley DHB regions surpassed those recorded in lockdown.
The DHBs' director of strategy, planning and performance, Rachel Haggerty, said Monday was the busiest day with close to 900 test requests received.
Bridget Allan, of Lower Hutt's Te Awakairangi Health Network, said they had to double staffing to keep up with demand over the last couple of weeks.
For those who received tests, many were left waiting days for results.
Bloomfield said with the large volume of tests received, the priority would be on immediately notifying health authorities to any positive tests.
"We have seen this big increase in the testing and that will be putting the pressure on the labs."
But before the criteria was changed, several experts criticised the widespread definition, which many attributed to the testing surge.
