Gym-peeping Govt exec escapes conviction ‘
Ahigh-level government manager with a porn “obsession” who planted a tiny camera in an Auckland gym bathroom and captured almost 40,000 images of people in various states of undress has escaped conviction and been granted permanent name suppression.
The secrecy around the case was driven in part by the man being promoted just before the Covid-19 lockdown and fear that his job and workplace would be negatively affected if his name and details of his offending went public.
The person who found the camera and alerted police is “disgusted” that the man got off “completely scot-free”. The person believed the man should be outed for his “gross crimes”.
The man was a manager within a government agency when the offending occurred.
He remains employed by the agency and now has a higher position. The promotion came after he disclosed his offending and guilty plea.
Suppression orders prevent the Herald from publishing any further details about his occupation, role or workplace.
Court documents reveal that on November 23, 2017, the man placed a small USB spy camera in the changing room of a gym.
The name and location of the gym are suppressed.
A police summary of facts revealed the camera was placed under the sink of a unisex changing room — viewing a bench area of the changing room.
Soon after, one of the victims discovered the camera and alerted the gym manager.
The camera was removed and police were called.
They found a total of 39,360 still images and 12 video files on the camera, showing six victims in various states of undress or naked.
The man eventually pleaded guilty to a representative charge of intentionally making an intimate visual recording of another person.
The man faced a maximum penalty of three years in jail.
But, despite police opposition, Judge Clare Bennett granted his application for a discharge without conviction, and his request for permanent name suppression when he appeared in the District Court last week.
“This is a case involving the surreptitious recording of intimate visual images,” said Judge Bennett.
“Offending like this is serious.”
But she said the offending was “an isolated incident” and she was satisfied that “the direct and indirect consequences of a conviction would be out of all proportion to the gravity of the offence”.
She accepted that if the man was convicted, he may lose his job and both his and the government agency’s reputation would be negatively impacted.
He would not be able to travel internationally, and there would be a significant impact on his family relationship.
The man was supposed to be sentenced in March and, anticipating “potential publication” of his name, gave notice to his employer that he was going to step down from his role “to avoid any negative publicity being visited upon that organisation”.
However, instead of stepping down, the man was promoted to a more senior role shortly before lockdown.
Judge Bennett said the man was of previous good character and had never appeared before the courts.
There was an “abundance of material” supporting his application.
She explained that the man’s childhood was “marked with hardship and deprivation”.
The court heard that the offending “may be seen as a response to his feelings of inadequacy which over time led to a regime of strict exercise and overindulgence in alcohol to deal with stress”.
“It is submitted that [the man] began suffering from erectile dysfunction, which exacerbated his sense of inadequacy,” said Judge Bennett. “This drove his passing interest in pornography into an obsession reaching the point of occupying three to four hours a day.
“It is within this context that the alleged offending occurred.”
Judge Bennett said the man was “extremely remorseful” and had taken significant steps towards rehabilitation including 73 sessions with a psychotherapist.
The man had also completed 190 hours of volunteer work.
Judge Bennett said his actions after the offending had “tempered” and “mitigated” the seriousness of it.
“I am satisfied in the circumstances that the consequences would be out of all proportion to the gravity of the offending,” she said.
She ordered him to pay $500 in court fees and granted the application for permanent name suppression.
The woman who uncovered the man’s offending was notified of the outcome of the case last week.
“(He) has got off completely scot-free,” she said.
“He has been given no conviction, has absolutely no penalty to his name or for the gross crimes he committed and simply received a $500 fine to pay to the courts. I can’t help but be disgusted by our justice system that has blatantly said to me that if you’re a wealthy, rich white guy — you can get away with anything.”
Defence lawyer Ron Mansfield said his client had no comment on the matter. Police have been asked if they intend to appeal Judge Bennett’s decision.
