As we emerge from Covid-19, our focus is on working with farmers and growers to...
As we emerge from Covid-19, our focus is on working with farmers and growers to continue to drive our economic recovery. Overseas consumers are now more than ever looking for healthy, New Zealand-made food — we’ve seen that with the sustained demand for fresh fruit, particularly in Europe and North America and the strong demand for red meat in China.
The Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the vital role that farmers and growers play in New Zealand’s economy, and as a key part of our social fabric. As an “essential service”, the primary sector helped feed Kiwis in lockdown and sent our high-quality food and fibre to international consumers despite the trade challenges.
Together, we kept places like Kiwifruit packhouses and meat works operating while limiting the spread of Covid-19. That is something other countries have struggled to achieve.
It’s important to recognise the great work under way in the primary sector — we were already adapting and transforming before Covid-19 happened. The ability to adapt means our primary sector exports are tracking to be 4.5 per cent higher this year than last. Given the effects of Covid-19 across economies, it’s something everyone can reflect on with pride.
But where to from here? Along with the sector, the Government is focused on creating more demand, pursuing greater market opportunities to generate higher export returns, and growing rural communities with new jobs.
There are several strands to that work — and all of it is done in partnership with farmers and growers.
First, we are training more workers. By supporting new start-up training courses at farming institutions such as Taratahi and Telford, we give people a practical taste and basic skills for work in the primary sector.
Budget 2020 included $19.3 million to place 10,000 people into primary sector jobs, $128 million for jobs to help control wilding pines and get populations of wallabies under control, and a $110 million worker redeployment package to create employment for people who have lost their jobs due to Covid-19.
We are equipping farmers and growers with the right tools to measure and reduce emissions through He Waka Eke Noa.
All of this work on our strong environmental credentials is critical to securing high-quality Free Trade Agreements — some of which kicked off this week. Overseas consumers are prepared to pay more for a trusted and sustainably-grown product.
That’s one of the reasons why we are working on cleaning up our waterways with our freshwater reforms and making sure farmers and growers have good plans in place to farm in the best way possible. We’re backing farmers on the ground through catchment groups, extending the work they’ve started, to improve knowledge about riparian planting and to get more information about sustainable practices.
Finally there’s the project work — all of it focused on helping our farmers and growers and lifting the value the sector gets for its products, which will underpin our economic recovery. That’s why MPI’s Sustainable Food and Fibre Futures programme is investing $40m a year in innovative projects to help the primary sector, and we’ve made $19m available to help drought-stricken farmers in the regions so far this year — including an extra $3 million in the drought relief advice fund just this week.
Covid-19 has helped remind me just how much other countries look to New Zealand for safely-produced food of a very high standard.
New Zealand food and fibre is not just good for us, it’s good for the world. I know we can make the most of our strengths, while providing an environment for more creativity and innovation.
