Warning for bach-goers to heed lockdown rules
‘A constant stream of trailers loaded with summer gear’ being towed through Thames
Bach owners heading to their second homes for the nationwide Covid-19 pandemic lockdown are being warned not to treat the next four weeks as an extension of their summer holiday.
People in rural enclaves outside the main centres are reporting people arriving towing trailer loads of “summer gear”, while a resident of a tiny Hauraki Gulf island had heard of bach owners planning to go between their two homes during the lockdown.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has warned Kiwis to stay home and interact only with those in their household.
Police commissioner Mike Bush reinforced the message in an interview with Newstalk ZB’s Chris Lynch.
“You only go out in your vehicle if you need to go and get essential food supplies, essential medical supplies or medical treatment. Otherwise, please stay at home.”
Thames-Coromandel mayor Sandra Goudie had a message for those choosing to see out the lockdown in baches in the district, a popular holiday destination with 49 per cent of ratepayers living out of the district.
A council staff member had told her of “a constant stream of trailers loaded with summer gear” being towed through Thames, and she had spoken to a man who was doing last-minute house repairs on two baches so Auckland families could move in for the lockdown.
City-based owners were welcome, but she urged them to stick to the lockdown rules in what is — due to the number of older residents — a vulnerable area, Goudie said.
“I totally agree with the first call, which is that people should isolate in their homes. But for those who want to do so in a second home, they need to be mindful of the fact they’re coming from a high infection area to a low infection area ... particularly when we have such a high over-65s population.” She also reiterated that any exercise out of the home should be done sensibly. “We don’t need added stress on our emergency services [if you get into trouble].”
Under the level 4 lockdown, access to New Zealand’s parks, reserves and beaches will be restricted and all surf lifesaving patrols suspended. Those within walking distance of beaches would still have access but it was not considered acceptable for people to drive to beaches.
Taupō district mayor David Trewavas, with a 45 per cent out-of-district home ownership rate, said he hoped anyone with pre-existing conditions would “seriously reconsider” coming to the area, given the local hospital was classified as rural.
Meanwhile, on the tiny Hauraki Gulf island, Rakino, permanent population about 20, resident Holly Shepheard — who has organised for a weekly group order of groceries to be ferried to the island during the lockdown — has also heard of people thinking of coming to their baches for the lockdown.
Some had talked about “going back and forth” between homes on the island and the mainland.
“People have said, ‘We’ll be coming and going over the next few weeks’ ... I’ve said, ‘You’re either here or you’re not’.”
And today, a blockade of the main routes into the Far North, along with “internal checkpoints” in other Far North locations, began.
Former Tai Tokerau MP Hone Harawira said volunteers at the “medical checkpoints” would turn back tourists and ensure locals returning from overseas were complying with self-isolation rules.
