Bosses need to help their staff to cope with the anxiety they are suffering after being in lockdown
The workforce has been cornered into a period of rapid change and economic shift. Each week the Herald will bring tips on how to prepare in uncertain times
New Zealanders struggling with back-to-work anxiety related to Covid-19 are being urged to seek help early.
As the impact of Covid-19 continues to deepen, wellbeing experts are calling on employers to be clear about what support is available — and for employees to use it.
There has already been a spike in demand for mental health services from people affected by increased workloads, work-from-home isolation, on-the-job anxiety, and those hit hard by job loss or business closure.
Many large corporations have Employment Assistance Programmes to provide independent support and counselling to staff. But Benestar chief executive Julie Cressey said quite often staff were unaware of what was available and how to access it.
“Employers need to be proactive about promoting the services and encourage staff to use it sooner rather than later,” she said. “If people get in touch early they might only need one or two sessions with a counsellor and be better equipped to deal with stress.”
Workers without access to EAPs had several free options through the Ministry of Health, said Robyn Shearer, deputy director general, mental health and addiction.
The recent $500 million Covid-19 response health package meant a range of free support was being rolled out across New Zealand.
Shearer said help was available by phone, text, web, and in-person through new digital tools, virtual therapy, and extra resources for telehealth services such as 1737.
She urged workers to visit the Ministry of Health website to see what service suited their needs.
There were mobile phone accessible apps such as Headspace and Mentemia and improved services with GPs. This included onsite mental health workers at 30 GP practices around New Zealand.
“Within minutes of a doctor seeing someone and realising they may need extra support, they can walk them down the corridor and introduce them,” Shearer said.
“People using these services report the life-changing effects of being able to see someone quickly — feeling less anxious, reconnecting with loved ones and sleeping better at night.”
Ministry of Health funding meant Mentemia — created by mental health advocate Sir John Kirwan — was free for all New Zealanders until at least October this year.
Health psychology specialist Dr Fiona Crichton, part of the Mentemia development team, said the app was designed specifically for the workplace. It included tips on coping when work wasn’t going well and advice on how to make plans when things might be out of your control such as social distancing when catching a bus.
Crichton urged employers to set realistic workloads, talk about mental well-being at work, and model healthy behaviour. “If employees see their boss leave the office to take a break, and talk about their own well-being, it encourages them to do the same,” she said.
