RUBBISH AND RECYCLING RULES DURING LOCKDOWN
Rubbish will still be collected as the country goes into coronavirus lockdown but some regions will halt recycling.
Those hoping to spend the four- week period clearing out junk from their homes will also not be able to visit the dump.
Councils which have stopped kerbside recycling say it is due to the health risks to its workers.
WELLINGTON
Kerbside recycling collections were to stop from midnight last night due to health and safety concerns.
Mayor Andy Foster said Wellington City Council's contractors had a limited staff roster so would focus on rubbish collection only.
Recycling involved a high degree of hand-sorting, both when going into the trucks and at the Oji Plant in Seaview.
"Given we understand the Covid-19 virus can remain active for up to three days on some surfaces like plastic, metal and glass, workers are facing too great a risk.
"Different councils run different systems. Some appear to be collecting recycling separate to the rubbish collection but are nevertheless still landfilling it."
He said people could either put the recycling into their rubbish bags or stockpile it for when recycling resumed.
The Southern Landfill will be closed to the general public.
Private-sector wheelie-bin rubbish collections would continue as normal, council said.
PORIRUA AND KAPITI COAST
Porirua City Council said it was business as usual for rubbish and recycling. However, the Spicer landfill has closed.
Kapiti City Council has advised rubbish collection will continue as normal but there will be no separate recycling or green waste collection.
Recycling centres and transfer station are closed.
HUTT VALLEY
Hutt City Council's rubbish collection will continue as an essential service, however recycling will not.
The council has made arrangements with a glass recycler to take away that material only.
Upper Hutt City Council's rubbish collection will continue but the council's recycling station has closed.
The two councils share the Silverstream Landfill which was to be closed to the public from today.
Exceptions may be made if quantities are not suitable for kerbside collection or if there is a threat to human health.
Existing account holders can continue using the tip.
PALMERSTON NORTH
Kerbside rubbish and recycling services in Palmerston North will continue to operate.
However, the Ferguson St recycling centre and the Awapuni green waste drop-off facilities have been closed.
