BREAKING RULES DURING LOCKDOWN
A year ago as Covid-19 rapidly spread around the globe, New Zealand went into its first countrywide, level 4 lockdown.
Bubbles were formed, PPE (personal protective equipment) was distributed, teddy bears were placed in windows and Kiwis stayed home in an unprecedented effort to break community transmission and keep each other safe. But not everyone stayed home. While most people sang the "team of 5 million" theme song, a handful of Kiwis broke the rules.
Here is a look at the worst rule breakers that made headlines in the past year:
A health minister's beach trip
Who could forget then health minister David Clark's mountain bike ride and family trip to the beach during the Covid-19 alert level 4 lockdown?
These breaches occurred in the early stages of the lockdown. Although there was some initial confusion around what outdoor activities were acceptable and what "staying local" actually meant, mountain biking was deemed as an activity to avoid because it posed a higher risk of injury.
After apologising for the mishap, Clark then found himself in hot water after revealing he and his family drove 20 kilometres to the beach during the first weekend of level 4. Clark admitted he had made an error of judgment and "let New Zealanders down", and rang the prime minister to offer his resignation.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern told a press conference Clark would have been sacked but she could not afford the "massive disruption" to the health sector.
His punishment for the breaches included being stripped of his associate finance minister portfolio and demoted to the bottom of the Government's Cabinet rankings. In July, he resigned from his position but stayed on as an MP.
Clark's mishaps also made headlines overseas alongside other high profile lockdown breaches, including Scotland's chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood.
Calderwood resigned after being caught visiting her second home twice, breaching her own stay-at-home advice. And the British prime minister's chief aide, Dominic Cummings, also came under fire for flouting the rules after he drove more than 400 kilometres from London to his parents' home in Durham during a strict lockdown.
A lockdown kidnapping
The most serious infringement during level 4 lockdown was a woman who committed two kidnappings in one day.
Back in April 2020, Jasmine Blake, 36, got into the vehicle of her first victim and threatened him to "just drive if you want to live". The man managed to flee the vehicle with his keys.
Blake then encountered her second victim and told him she possessed a gun and a knife. She directed the victim to a bank cash machine, before taking money and his phone. Blake was sentenced to nine months of home detention which was to be served at a rehabilitation facility.
The MIQ absconders
In the past year, there have been 10 instances, involving 14 people, of returnees absconding from a managed isolation and quarantine facility. This is a drop in the bucket compared with the nearly 120,000 returnees who have completed their 14-day stay in the facilities without incident.
Martin James McVicar was one who made headlines last year for absconding from a Hamilton-based isolation facility. He cut the cable ties that secured an outside perimeter fence and walked to a liquor store. Following his excursion, he spent six days on remand at Spring Hill Corrections Facility. He was later sentenced by a judge to 40 hours of community work and ordered to pay $1000 in reparation for damaging a television in his hotel room.
Other MIQ fleeing incidents included a person allegedly breaking and climbing out of their hotel window and scaling a fence; a woman escaping by jumping over a brick wall; a man allegedly climbing down bedsheets from a fourth storey window; and another man allegedly going for a stroll to the supermarket.
Last year, police were posted outside the isolation hotels as a result of the serious facility breaches.
No absconding incidents have occurred in the past five months, with the last one occurring on October 9, 2020, a managed isolation and quarantine spokesperson said.
What the numbers show
The maximum penalty for intentionally breaching the Covid- 19 Public Health Response Act is six months' jail or a $4000 fine.
Of the 787 charges for breach of Covid-19 restrictions, 70 per cent (553 charges) ended in conviction, Ministry of Justice figures show.
By December 31, 2020, 18 per cent of people convicted of breach of Covid-19 restrictions offences received imprisonment (85 people). While 43 per cent (198 people) received a community sentence - such as home detention, community detention, intensive supervision, community work or supervision.
The area with the most people convicted for breaching Covid-19 restrictions was Wellington, with 75 convictions across both the city and northern Wellington areas. Then came Auckland, with 74 convictions across Auckland, Waitemata and South Auckland areas.
Other rule breakers
During lockdown level 4, a woman was charged with common assault after allegedly punching a supermarket manager in the face.
A Christchurch man was arrested back in April after filming himself coughing and sneezing on shoppers at a supermarket.
Raymond Gary Coombs was described as "an idiot" by the prime minister after his prank came to light. He apologised, saying he did not think his actions through. He was later jailed for driving offences.
A Whanganui man was sent to prison for a month after repeated breaches of Covid-19 alert level 4 restrictions.
The 38-year-old man had been given verbal warnings five times and upon his sixth warning, police discovered the man had driven "some distance" away from his home with no valid reason.
Australian woman Lucinda Baulch made the news this year for her extensive time in managed isolation. She was in a Wellington MIQ facility for 28 days because she refused to take a Covid-19 test.
The maximum time a person who is in a bubble of one and is asymptomatic can be required to remain in an isolation facility under the Quarantine Order is 28 days.
