LOCKDOWN LIFE LIFTS CAR SHARING
Auckland and Wellington car share service Cityhop has seen a massive spike in new users in the months following the April-May national Covid-19 lockdown.
Ben Carter, general manager of Cityhop, put the 80 per cent leap in new customers down to more people working from home, and the return of New Zealanders from cities overseas, where car share services are better known.
"Many have had a glimpse of a better, car-light, low-cost, and low carbon lifestyle. This is creating disruption to business fleets and private car ownership," said Carter.
"Since the level 4 lockdown in March we have had 6000 new members join and use our car share service. This is significantly higher than we had forecasted."
Cityhop members hire its cars by the hour, or day, with regular users, who pay a monthly $10 subscription fee, paying lower hire rates.
Hourly hire rates for those paying the $10 monthly fee, range from $9.50 per hour, plus a 40 cents per kilometre charge, on a Toyota Yaris, to $15 per hour with no per kilometre charge on a Volkswagen E-Golf.
Daily rates work out more cheaply, and while insurance and fuel is included in the price of hire, users who want to bring down the insurance excess have to pay extra.
He said there were three factors behind the increase: People returning from overseas familiar with car sharing, households deciding to live with one car fewer, and businesses scaling down their car fleets.
"Some of these new members are Kiwis returning home from big cities where they were used to living without a car, and now don't want the burden of buying and maintaining one," Carter said.
"They became familiar with car share overseas and are comfortable with the idea of just paying to use a car when you need one."
After lockdown ended, car travel bounced back as many people resumed their pre-Covid activities, but Carter said the lockdown prompted some people to think about their car ownership habits.
"Many more people realised during lockdown their car, often a second car, was mostly parked up," he said.
"They didn't want the costs of a car, and a car park for something not used often. It makes sense to live with one less car, or perhaps without a car when you can use a Cityhop car whenever you need," Carter said.
When the pandemic struck, CityHop put hand sanitiser in every car, and increased the frequency with which vehicles were cleaned. All cars have Covid tracker QR codes.
Carter said there was initially a drop-off in usage, but that eased as New Zealand moved back up through the alert levels.
Carter has a master's degree in microbiology after studying under Dr Siouxsie Wiles, who became known to the public during the fight against Covid-19.
"That knowledge has come in handy," Carter said.
Surveying new customers in the months after they signed up, Cityhop found just under half either sold a car, delayed buying one, or lived without owning a car at all car.
Around a third made more journeys by walking or cycling after signing up, and just under 40 per cent used public transport more.
Some businesses had been reviewing their car needs as well, Carter said.
"With so many more people working from home, it's not easy to access company cars that live at the office. This has seen many businesses letting go of underutilised fleet vehicles and expensive car parks."
"This means more money for keeping staff and not making people redundant," he said.
One Auckland company that made the shift was Isthmus Group, which specialises in designing urban spaces that better suit human, rather than car needs, and has a strong biking culture.
Isthmus founder Gavin Lister gave up his personal car park nearly 10 years ago so the city centre fringe office could host a Cityhop car share vehicle.
Penny McIntyre, chief operating officer, said: "Using a car share system means we help reduce vehicles in the city and create more space for people."
