AIR AMBULANCES RULE EMPTY SKIES
The big planes that usually rule New Zealand's skies have all but disappeared during the coronavirus lockdown, but there are still some smaller dots moving about on the radar.
Air New Zealand has grounded most of its fleet, reduced to flying freight and a few hundred passengers around the country each day, and second-tier airlines Sounds Air and Air Chathams have also suspended all but essential flights.
Among the smaller operators, tourist-focused companies face a bleak outlook but the future looks brighter for others.
"There will be some inevitable failures simply because there's less demand to go around, and there'll be others that their existing customer base will be fine or that will be able to pivot into new markets, but it's not going to save all of them," said independent economist Benje Patterson.
Life will still be difficult for airlines at alert level 3, but with the emphasis on safe rather than essential there will be more freight and some more passengers. As demand returns, the companies that survive will expand to fill the gaps.
"I wouldn't be too worried over the longer term, but obviously over the short run there will be some unsettling times for the owners of these operations, and also for some of the customers that relied on the service but simply there weren't enough of them to keep it operating in the meantime," Patterson said.
Christchurch-based GCH Aviation, which also has operations in Fiji and Vanuatu, continued its fixed-wing New Zealand Flying Doctor medical flights and its South Island helicopter rescue operations during level 4.
The company has kept all its staff employed, helped by the Government wage subsidy, but hours have dropped and staff have taken a pay cut.
GCH bought a 10-passenger long-haul jet, a Bombardier Challenger 604, but the pandemic struck before it could begin flying. It also operates two eight-person Beechcraft Super King Air 200 planes, and a six- person Cessna Conquest.
"When we do get occasion to fly, it will be repatriation and quite a bit of medical and other work that can be done in this particular phase," said marketing manager Caroline Blanchfield.
The first commercial helicopter jobs in level 3 would include inspecting power lines and construction work, along with people wanting to check on their businesses after lockdown.
Medical work demand was growing, and with more people moving about there would also be more rescue helicopter work, she said.
