CLOSURE SPLITS EMIGRATING FAMILY IN HALF
They quit their jobs, sold the house, called in the removals firm. At the other end, they had a new home and work lined up. Then coronavirus struck.
It has split a family in half: Marlene Mitchell and her daughter Tegan White made the move to Australia before the Covid-19 lockdown began. Marlene's husband, Garth, and Tegan's boyfriend, Folani 'Lani' Pokani, who had stayed to load the moving truck and ensure the house sale was completed in Auckland, have been left behind.
And now they are worried about when Pokani will be able to follow. Marlene and Tegan, both Australian citizens, had no issues crossing the border. But the men, both New Zealand nationals, have had a bureaucratic nightmare.
The Australian border is shut to non-Australians and New Zealanders who don't usually reside there. Australian Immigration's Auckland branch office is shut, and Mitchell has been told there is no phone number he can ring - the only option is to apply online for permission to travel.
Mitchell finally got permission to leave after six attempts - eventually proving his 19-year relationship with his wife after attaching property records, a marriage certificate, his wife's change of name to take his surname, personal statements and passport scans. He's hoping he will be now able to see her in mid-May - after compulsory isolation on arrival - after being apart nearly two months. But Pokani has tried 13 times to navigate the online system without success.
Mitchell says Pokani, 20, whose mother died when he was 12, has become like a son to him.
The plan in Sydney was for the entire family to reunite in one house, with Mitchell's Australian resident 24-year-old son Josh and his partner also joining them. "If Covid-19 wasn't happening, we would be there but because of the border restrictions, we have to prove special circumstances or compassionate grounds or a partnership," says Mitchell, who believes Pokani has provided enough paperwork to prove a genuine relationship.
"If you can get the Warriors [rugby league team] over there, surely you can put families back together."
