DECISION ON PERTH TRAVEL SUSPENSION DUE TODAY
Travel between New Zealand and Perth remains on pause until at least today, when the New Zealand Government will decide if flights can resume.
Perth's snap three-day lockdown will end as planned today, after no new Covid-19 cases were recorded in the city overnight.
Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said the government would consider further advice from health officials today. In response to the lockdown, quarantine-free flights to and from Perth, as part of the trans- Tasman bubble arrangement, were paused on Friday night.
In a statement, Hipkins said: "Our risk assessment remains that the public health risk to New Zealand is low".
Additional information from Western Australia, particularly more results from the additional testing that has been done, was expected to be available today.
Hipkins said the Government was working to confirm its position before the first flight scheduled to leave Western Australia tonight.
Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan said the lockdown had worked as a circuit-breaker to stop the virus spreading. "Lockdown was necessary, and it worked," he said yesterday.
Travel is now allowed out of the state, but some interim restrictions remain, including limits on gatherings.
Mask-wearing remains compulsory indoors and outdoors and on public transport, and anyone leaving Perth must continue to wear a mask, McGowan said.
The interim restrictions are scheduled to last until Saturday, but will be reviewed alongside case numbers and test results from contacts.
Shops, bars and restaurants will be able to open from today with a limit of 20 patrons and schools will re-open.
A new outbreak in the community, stemming from a cluster at the Mercure Hotel Perth isolation facility, prompted the shutdown, which took effect from 12.01am (local time) on April 24.
The virus was found to have spread among quarantining guests in separate rooms, and travelled interstate after a man, who completed 14 days in managed isolation opposite an infected couple who returned from India, tested positive on arrival in Melbourne, Victoria.
He had spent five days in the community in Perth with a friend before his departure.
The friend tested positive from a rapid test on Friday. A man in his 40s who visited the same restaurant as the pair later tested positive.
