Government vows to act on anyone milking crisis
Employers, landlords, shops and ordinary Kiwis on notice as police won’t hesitate to put people into custody
After ushering New Zealand into lockdown, Government leaders will now clamp down on anyone looking to take advantage of the coronavirus crisis.
If you don’t pass on the wage subsidy scheme on to your staff that’s fraud, says Finance Minister Grant Robertson.
If you continue to breach the lockdown rules that’s obstruction of police, says Police Commissioner Mike Bush.
If you’re a landlord and you unfairly threaten your tenant, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern wants your name.
And if you don’t play your part and stay home to break the chain of Covid-19, lives could be lost, says Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield. Bush warned people who broke the rules repeatedly would be put into custody so they could think about the “consequences of their actions”.
“Stay home to stay safe. If we don’t comply, the consequence of that is people will die,” Bush said.
Stricter procedures at the border were in force and of the 360 people who flew into Auckland Airport yesterday morning, almost half were quarantined for being symptomatic or not having a solid plan for self-isolation.
Worldwide, the death toll of the Covid-19 pandemic yesterday topped 21,000 with more than 471,000 infected — Britain’s Prince Charles now counted among them.
In New Zealand, the total number of cases reached 283, with 78 new cases confirmed yesterday.
The majority of cases were still linked to overseas travel or being a close contact of another confirmed case.
But there were several clusters of suspected community transmission, including Marist College in Auckland, the World Hereford cattle conference in Queenstown, a wedding in Wellington, a contact with the Ruby Princess cruise ship in Hawke’s Bay and a rest home in Hamilton.
Seven people were in hospital with Covid-19, all in a stable condition, while 27 Kiwis have recovered from the virus.
Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield confirmed Covid-19 cases could peak in the thousands but now New Zealand was in lockdown, he hoped the turnaround point would be in 10 days. Bloomfield also announced that as a precaution, and due to stockpiling, pharmacists would be limited to providing only one month’s supply of prescribed medicines, or three months for the supply of oral contraceptives.
Pharmacists would still be able to make exceptions..
Robertson urged every business to try to keep their staff employed throughout the crisis and said that’s why the wage subsidy scheme was in place.
About $1.54b had already been paid out for 244,887 workers; 72,913 applications had been paid out, while a further 111,898 had been approved and were about to be paid, and 47,434 were being processed.
Robertson also had stern words for landlords threatening renters after property manager Quinovic told tenants they would get a 14-day notice if they missed rent payments.
Despite the lockdown order, two Mad Butcher stores were open in Auckland yesterday which didn’t impress the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
“Butcher shops are not classified as essential.
“What they supply can largely also be purchased at supermarkets.
Police visited bargain store Crackerjack in Hamilton yesterday to discuss whether it should be open.
In an email to staff obtained by the Herald, CEO Craig Faulkner said the company was classified as an essential service because 70 per cent of its stock was hygiene, cleaning, food and grocery products.
Police would not comment and the company did not respond to calls.
