QUIET WELLINGTON'S COVID-19 FRONTLINE war
Read more LOCKDOWN SNAPSHOTS FROM AROUND THE REGION PAGES 6-8
--------------------
Imiss them. Did not think I would ever say that but it is true.
The teenager on her cellphone, oblivious to the pace and direction of others. The older people and tourists clogging the path with their ambling shuffle. The wanderers cutting our straight lines with their annoying twists and turns.
Humans - there are few at the vast, usually busy intersection of the Courtenay, Manners and Taranaki thoroughfares.
Little need to observe the crossing lights either. At the intersection's centre, I stop and take notes: from the waterfront, all the way up Taranaki St towards Mt Cook, neither car nor human is moving. Even the seagulls commanding Te Aro Park look listless and a little lost.
They stir slightly as three buses punctuate the sombre reverie: Numbers 24, 3 and 14. One passenger between them. So often an annoying attack on sensitive ears, they are now empty sentinels breaking the mood, hinting at the possibility of human interaction. But their presence merely stays the silence, their passing bringing it flooding back.
The beeps of the crossing signals along Cuba St, so often lost in the general cacophony of the city, are now piercing sirens for those lost in the fog of war against this virus.
It is a silence that sits in the dark and gloom inside so many empty, shuttered bars, restaurants, offices and shops - in Cuba and Willis; Lambton Quay and The Terrace. Signs in the windows speak to fears of business owners that this pervading silence might be shattered by those with their own dark intentions.
"No cash or stock on premises", they scream in large, capital letters meant, if not for the marauders of the zombie apocalypse then at least for the malevolent opportunists among us.
Wellington's inner city in lockdown looks like a set for The Walking Dead, without the weeds and decay of years of neglect but with its own detritus of rubbish stirred by an indifferent wind, and a homeless person's discarded sleeping bag. We may not have the ravenous Walkers but the living still look wary. The few supermarket shoppers and rubber-neckers to history shuffle quickly, quietly past, always at a distance.
As colleague Virginia Fallon has pointed out, they are the clean-bummed bison who herded the toilet paper as the lockdown loomed. Now they regard me and others outside their bubble as potential predators on a quiet, uncertain, nervy plain.
Some wear masks; one guy on the other side of the street has one but he has given up. It is resting on the back of his neck. Who can blame him - there are no teens on their phones, oblivious of everyone but themselves; no older people or tourists out of time with the rhythm of a fast-paced city. No wanderers following their own crooked paths.
There is nobody. Alas. I miss them.
