AIR TRAVELLERS BUSSED STRAIGHT TO HOTEL
Kiwis arriving back in the country have been bussed straight to an Auckland hotel and waiting family members.
And a fleet of campervans has been installed at nearby showgrounds for new arrivals who might need a place to self- isolate during the coronavirus lockdown.
Yesterday, multiple charter buses brought newly arrived passengers from Auckland Airport to a hotel in Ellerslie, 17 kilometres away. One Auckland man who arrived outside the Novotel about 4.30pm said he was picking his daughter up. She had travelled from Germany via Sydney.
"The police told them there would be a bus bringing them [here]," the father said after parking his car at the nearby racecourse. Multiple police cars, and officers wearing gloves and face masks, were stationed around the hotel.
At least four buses arrived in the space of 40 minutes, dropping off passengers.
The father said his daughter would self- isolate at home.
A male passenger whose family collected him had also arrived from Australia.
About 5pm, two Auckland Transport Airporter buses arrived at the Novotel.
The passengers, all wearing surgical masks, were then ushered inside by police and security guards, also wearing protective equipment. Another bus arrived but only about seven passengers were on board, some with masks and some without.
It was not immediately clear if the operation was also being run partly to relieve airport congestion or provide a quarantine or self-isolation location for new arrivals. The airport has been keen to stop all unnecessary visitors. And on Wednesday, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said everyone arriving into the country would be screened, and those without self-isolation plans would be taken to approved facilities.
Meanwhile, the Ministry of Health said campervans set up and on standby at the ASB showgrounds in Greenlane were part of the precautionary approach to ensuring travellers returning to New Zealand could isolate. Campervans and hotels will be used in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch as accommodation for people potentially returning from overseas during the alert level 4 lockdown. "At the campervan sites, such as the ASB showgrounds and the Canterbury Agricultural Park, caterers have been identified to supply food, while people will be able to utilise online shopping," a ministry spokesman said.
The campervans were self-contained.
"At this stage, these campervans have not yet been used and remain as a precautionary option," the ministry added.
All staff at campervan sites and hotels would get training and personal protective equipment, the ministry said.
