LOCKDOWN, ONE YEAR ON Athlete with autism brings can-do attitude A rocky first year but their restaurant's still here Bruce the bear finds new home, while former owner battles to see partner Offline teaching fires up chef's joy
On March 25, 2020, at 11.59pm, New Zealand went into lockdown in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. During our 33 days of self-isolation, Stuff profiled many people making the most of an unprecedented situation. One year on, we catch up with some of them.
--------------------
Athlete with autism brings can-do attitude
--------------------
When Matthew Di Leva found out the country was going into lockdown, the essential worker quickly adapted to the new rules.
Putting on his gloves and mask, Di Leva stocked shelves and worked as a trolley assistant at New World in Wellington's Newtown.
Di Leva, who has autism, had been working at the supermarket since 2019, when he was offered work experience. Di Leva and his mother, Maria Di Leva, dropped off his CV at 42 workplaces - the only place that offered him work was New World.
Di Leva took on his mother's advice while he was at work: "Always smile and do your best."
"I did but, after a while, I realised no-one could see me smile as I had a mask on. But I did anyway," the 25-year-old said.
While Di Leva loved being an essential worker, the worst thing about lockdown was not being able to see his family or take part in sports.
"Another thing that was hard for me was not knowing how long it would go on for," he said.
"I used to watch TV and hear the prime minister say to be kind. I have always tried to be kind, but I tried extra hard."
Di Leva was pleased when the country moved down alert levels. The family had a 10-person dinner to celebrate his dad's 70th birthday. Despite not being able to play basketball, go swimming or take part in his hip-hop dance group, Just Dance Krazy, Di Leva kept up with his exercise, doing yoga and going for walks with his bubble.
Maria Di Leva said when her son was first diagnosed with autism, they were told Matthew should stay at an institution.
The family were proud of his accomplishments.
Last weekend, Di Leva went to a regional sports competition where he placed and won medals for athletics, she said.
And, this year, he would be heading to the Special Olympics National Summer Games in Hamilton, competing in athletics.
"He loves life and everyone in his flat all care about each other, and as a family we have learnt so much from Matthew."
During lockdown, checkout manager at New World Newtown Jamie Stewart said Di Leva played an important role in keeping customers and staff safe. He took on the additional role of trolley assistant, which meant he sanitised trolleys.
"Passionate about health and safety, he took this in his stride and did a great job," Stewart said.
Now, in lockdown alert level 1, Di Leva continued to bring "his great attitude and zest for life to work", he said.
Stewart was delighted at how much progress Di Leva had made in his role over the past year.
"Matthew's an integral part of the team, and customers love his friendly, can-do attitude towards the job."
--------------------
A rocky first year but their restaurant's still here
--------------------
Opening a restaurant is tough at the best of times - but tougher still from isolation, with a sick toddler, as the city moves up alert levels on your opening day.
Despite it all, you could call Casey and Blair Wilson lucky; their hospitality business survived Covid- 19 while many around Wellington were forced to shut.
The couple, who already had their Wilson Barbecue food truck pre-Covid, were about to open a proper restaurant, also called Wilson Barbecue, in Johnsonville in April. But those plans were scuttled when New Zealand went into lockdown from 11.59pm on March 25 to 11.59pm on April 27.
Opening day was then set for August 12, but coronavirus was not yet done with the Wilson family.
It was August 11 when four new cases of Covid-19 were found in the community in Auckland and the following day Auckland was put into alert level 3 and the rest of New Zealand - including Johnsonville - into alert level 2.
It was also August 11 when Casey took toddler Noah for medical attention after he showed some Covid-19 symptoms. He ended up getting a Covid-19 test, and mother and son were put into isolation at Wellington Hospital. Blair was ordered to isolate at home.
This meant that they had to orchestrate the restaurant's opening - amid new level 2 restrictions - from afar.
It was 5pm when Noah's test came back all-clear, and they were able to make opening night after all.
They now looked likely to survive a rocky year, but it had been tough, Casey said. Their food truck normally did a lot of weddings but many of those were cancelled, and the Newtown Festival - usually one of its busiest days of the year - was postponed in 2021.
But the new restaurant was going well, and they had set up a sideline business selling barbecue sauces and rubs. "However, we are impacted each time we go to level 2, as bookings are cancelled, and we see less walk-ins," Casey said.
--------------------
Bruce the bear finds new home, while former owner battles to see partner
--------------------
A year ago, Gemma McCaughey was on the front page of The Dominion Post because she was dressing her teddy bear, Bruce, in a different outfit each day.
Bears began appearing in windows after the country went into lockdown, offering bright spots on people's walks through their neighbourhoods.
Now Bruce has a new home, while McCaughey is still battling to see her partner, who's currently living in Bali.
"It's been a bit of a struggle," the hospitality worker said of her intercontinental relationship.
Still living in Porirua's Paremata with her parents, McCaughey is hopeful she and her partner will be together soon.
The pair have been in a long- distance relationship after meeting at a hotel check-in desk in Bali in 2019 while travelling separately.
After spending two weeks together, they parted ways, but it wasn't long before McCaughey travelled to South Africa - where her partner's from - to visit him for three months before returning to New Zealand. Things were looking up for the couple to be together when he got his visa approved to come to Aotearoa, but then lockdown hit, and he had to remain overseas.
The pair have remained in constant touch: video calls at breakfast, lunch and dinner, and texting one another photos and messages. He's moved to Bali after having a visa approved there. McCaughey is still waiting to hear back on her application, while simultaneously trying to get him to New Zealand.
"I just want a cuddle. We are fighting the world 100 per cent. We're doing everything we can to be together. We're pushing through," McCaughey said.
One year on, the burger joint she works at, Dirty Burger, has opened a new store in Upper Hutt on Main St, and McCaughey's been working long days. "That's been a bit crazy."
Her boss had been particularly supportive in trying to get her partner here.
And Bruce the bear has a new owner. During lockdown, a 2-year- old girl from across the street came to visit him in the window up to 10 times a day. As soon as she was able, McCaughey cleaned Bruce and took him over the road, leaving a note for the girl saying to please give him love every day.
McCaughey is hopeful she will see her partner soon. "If we can make it through this, we can do anything. I definitely feel like the struggle is a solid foundation for our future together."
--------------------
Offline teaching fires up chef's joy
--------------------
When Maxine Scheckter found out the country was going into lockdown, there was "ugly crying and freaking out".
During Covid-19 alert level 4, people were told to stay home in their bubbles as schools closed and gatherings were cancelled. Businesses were shut except for essential services.
For Scheckter, the young patisserie chef who runs Sugar Flour, this meant she could not teach her in-person classes on how to make pastries, bread and other sweet treats.
This led to her moving classes online and dropping off ingredients via contactless delivery.
A year on, she has moved her business from Wellington's Kilbirnie to a larger kitchen in Miramar.
The 25-year-old is also hoping to write her first cookbook.
"I've pressed pause on the online baking classes. It was really good, and helped us get through lockdown, but it was a lot of work to weigh everything up and deliver it," Scheckter said.
The online classes were something she might come back to, but instead of sticking her iPhone on a tripod, she hoped to record classes with more professional gear and have them be more in-depth.
There was nothing like teaching classes to people face to face, she said.
"I think one of the best things about teaching in person is seeing the immediate satisfaction people have.
"A lot of people come to classes and think, 'No way am I going to do this - I'll just have fun,' and then seeing them put everything together and do a good job of it - it's amazing."
Reflecting on the lockdown experience, Scheckter was grateful for the support from customers.
A bad memory was the stress of thinking she could lose her business.
She said: "The good memory to come out of it was how people were brought together by baking, and seeing the joy customers had over seeing the baking boxes.
"Some customers told me the baking boxes were helpful with their mental health - that's close to my heart and really meant a lot to me.
"That's something I'll hold onto for a while."
Sugar Flour also passed its three-year mark, something the chef could not quite believe. "I'm blown away by it all," she said.
With a larger space, Scheckter was looking forward to teaching more people.
She was also planning a Mother's Day class, inspired by her own mum and her Jewish heritage. The class would involve "Ottolenghi-style baking".
Scheckter was also looking for a publisher for a cookbook she is creating. There were a lot of recipes she wanted to include, but her main goal was to produce a cookbook that she herself would have loved when she was younger.
