$27M FOR NGOS AS GOVT OFFERS LOCKDOWN HELP
78 new cases Director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said yesterday health officials had identified 78 new cases of Covid-19, including 73 confirmed and 5 probable cases. Seven people were in hospital, and 27 had recovered from the virus. The majority of the new cases appeared to have links to overseas, and further clusters of the virus and community transmission were being investigated.
--------------------
The Government will give $27 million to social service providers like the Salvation Army and Women's Refuge to help the vulnerable in a locked- down New Zealand.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, at a press conference yesterday, said the money allows these organisation to keep housing people, feeding people, and sheltering people from domestic violence.
"There have been increases in demand for services by those in need at this time," she said.
New Zealand entered a four- week lockdown yesterday, as the number of coronavirus cases jumped to 283. There is hope the strict self-isolation of the population will break transmission of the virus, which is expected to spread to thousands of Kiwis.
Ardern said she hoped the country has had a good first day of lockdown, and that, broadly, it appeared to be going well. "Supermarkets are generally orderly," she said.
Ardern said she knows the lockdown order may increase domestic violence. Part of this $27m will go towards Women's Refuge to set up accommodation for women and children who need to leave their home during the lockdown.
Social Development Minister Carmel Sepuloni said the money would help non-government organisations and community groups to continue to provide essential services during the lockdown.
"They are supporting New Zealanders to stay well during our fight to break the chain of transmission of the virus, which will save lives," she said.
The organisations that have been funded are meant to ensure people have access to food and other important goods, have a place to live, support the disabled and to keep families safe from domestic violence.
"Self-isolation can also mean the risk of family violence increases. That's why we are making sure family violence and sexual violence services will remain available for those in need," Sepuloni said.
Finance Minister Grant Robertson, also at yesterday's press conference, said 244,887 workers were now part of the wage subsidy scheme, and 72,913 applications have been paid out. Another 111,000 applications have been approved and were about to be paid out.
