FRUSTRATION AT WAIT FOR LEVEL 3
Leaders south of Auckland have expressed frustration and disappointment over staying in full lockdown for another four days - despite having no community cases of Covid-19 for nearly 300 days.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced yesterday afternoon that all of New Zealand south of Auckland would move down an alert level at 11.59pm on Tuesday. Auckland and Northland would remain at level 4.
The move was a reflection of the South Island and lower North Island managing to remain Covid-free since the latest outbreak in Auckland that plunged the country into lockdown on August 17.
Ardern said no decision had been made for how long level 3 would be in place. It would be reviewed weekly.
She urged anyone with Covid symptoms to get tested. If there was any evidence the Government had made the wrong call in changing levels, it would fix that, she said.
Thousands of Covid-19 tests have been done in the South Island over the past nine days, but none have returned positive results.
Christchurch wastewater tested positive for the virus on Saturday and Monday, but Crown scientific research body ESR stressed it was probably due to the four Covid-19 cases in the city's managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) facilities.
Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield said samples were being taken from pump stations to rule out any positive community cases.
The last community cases in Canterbury were two health workers at the Sudima Airport Hotel MIQ facility. They tested positive on November 2 and November 3 last year (297 days ago), while a large group of Russian and Ukrainian mariners were in MIQ.
Ardern said keeping New Zealand in level 4 for four more days would give authorities more confidence.
There were also cases in Wellington, with contacts expected to return test results in the coming days.
Queenstown Lakes District mayor Jim Boult, who had been advocating for the South Island to move to alert level 2 this weekend, was disappointed by the four-day wait for level 3. "Clearly it's a whole lot worse than I thought it would be."
Level 3 lets businesses operate if they can do so without physical contact, and opens schools to children whose parents need to work. Restaurants and other eateries are allowed to open for contactless delivery and takeaways.
It still requires people to work from home if possible, and only exercise and shop close to home.
Boult said Kiwis' health must come first, but the longer level 4 lasted the more the economic health of tourism towns such as Queenstown, Wanaka and Te Anau would suffer. His biggest concern was getting skifields open - even if only for South Islanders. "It would bring some people into town . . . and it gives people a bit of hope. Now we're just looking at another gloomy week."
Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Leeann Watson said businesses had hoped to reopen on Saturday or have the weekend to put plans in place for Monday.
"We know that at alert level 3, 90 per cent of businesses will be able to operate and do so safely."
The Treasury had forecast that being in lockdown cost the country $1.45 billion a week, but that did not include the emotional toll, she said.
Tourism Industry Aotearoa welcomed yesterday's announcement as the first step in lifting restrictions.
"Tourism was the first industry to be affected by the pandemic and will be the last to recover," chief executive Chris Roberts said.
"For many, the most useful thing they can do right now is encourage their staff, their whanau and everyone they know to get vaccinated."
