IN BRIEF
Uber Eats chips inIn welcome news to struggling restaurants and takeaway outlets, Uber Eats is slashing its costs. The company has recently been feeling the heat for charging between 30-35 per cent on all orders. Uber Eats yesterday said it was doing its bit to support local businesses. “In times of hardship New Zealanders rally together,” its website stated. The Uber Eats app will reopen for business at 10am today, as NZ begins its first day at alert level 3. It also pledged 25,000 delivered meals to hospital workers and frontline services. 600,000 get flu jabJust shy of 600,000 Kiwis have already had the flu jab this year, more than double the number of those vaccinated this time last year. Associate Health Minister Julie Anne Genter said that despite the national lockdown, the record-breaking scheme immunised several of those at risk. While the jab did not protect again Covid-19, it reduced the burden on the healthcare system, which saw a surge in flu cases in winter, she said.
Paired with coronavirus patients, hospitals could quickly be swamped.
Iwi checkpointsTaranaki iwi community checkpoints at the northern, eastern and southern boundaries of the region will begin to query travellers on the roads. Iwi representatives say the checkpoints will be operating with support from Taranaki police in Urenui and Patea, and a mobile police patrol will operate at the eastern entrance to Taranaki along the Forgotten Highway (State Highway 43). The checkpoints mean people travelling into Taranaki will be queried about their reasons for being on the road.. 1000 cases a dayNew Zealand could have had 1000 cases of the deadly virus a day if the country hadn’t gone into lockdown when it did, the Government claims. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said NZ had avoided the worst, but said people needed to remain vigilant to make sure it avoids a second wave of Covid-19. Under level 3 restrictions it was not a time to socialise, she said.
Song for RSARecreating a song produced two years ago to raise funds for the Cancer Foundation, James and Mārama Stent have just released We are the Ones Unite (Against Covid 19), this time raising money for war veterans. The song is available to download and play now, with all proceeds to the Returned and Services Association.
