IN BRIEF
600,000 get flu jabJust shy of 600,000 Kiwis have already had the flu jab this year, more than double the number of those vaccinated this time last year. Associate Health Minister Julie Anne Genter said that despite the national lockdown, the record-breaking vaccination programme immunised a number of those at risk. While the flu vaccination did not protect again Covid-19, it reduced the burden on the healthcare system, which saw a surge in flu cases in winter, she said. Paired with coronavirus patients, hospitals could quickly be swamped.
Contact tracing appThe Government has promised that a Covid-19 contact tracing app will be available in less than two weeks. The announcement comes as the Australian Government launched its own voluntary app, designed to limit the spread of Covid-19 through an early notification system. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has said technology will be part of the answer to speeding up contact tracing.
Iwi checkpointsTaranaki iwi community checkpoints at the northern, eastern and southern boundaries of the region will begin to query travellers on the roads tomorrow. Iwi representatives say the checkpoints will be operating with support from Taranaki police in Urenui and Patea, and a mobile police patrol will be operating at the eastern entrance to Taranaki along the Forgotten Highway (State Highway 43). The checkpoints mean people who are travelling into Taranaki will be queried about their reasons for being on the road.. 1000 cases a dayNew Zealand could have had 1000 cases of the deadly virus a day if the country hadn’t gone into lockdown when it did, the Government claims. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said NZ had avoided the worst, but said people needed to remain vigilant to make sure the country did not have a second wave of Covid-19. She said that under level 3 restrictions it was not a time to socialise.
Song for RSARecreating a song produced two years ago to raise funds for the Cancer Foundation, James and Mārama Stent have just released We are the Ones Unite (Against Covid 19), this time raising money for war veterans. The song is available to download and play now, with all proceeds to the Returned and Services Association.
