Help us, pleads Kiwi stranded in Wuhan’s coronavirus lockdown
A New Zealand citizen trapped at the epicentre of China’s coronavirus outbreak is pleading with the Government to do more to get New Zealanders out.
Joanna — who works as a software engineer in New York and asked not to be named — travelled to Wuhan on January 20 to visit her father for the Chinese New Year.
She’s now stuck in the locked-down city and has not left the house for five days for fear of catching the deadly virus.
Joanna, who only wanted her first name used, told RNZ’s Checkpoint she had tried to seek assistance from the New Zealand embassy in Beijing, but was told they were on holiday until Wednesday.
After calling an emergency hotline, she was directed to register online at SafeTravel.govt.nz and to wait for further details, she said.
“I feel a little disappointed since many other countries are taking action already, but it seems like the New Zealand Government is falling behind.”
The United States has arranged for its citizens to be evacuated from the city and Australia is exploring plans to follow suit.
Japan is expected to arrange a charter flight tomorrow for any of its citizens who wish to return.
Chinese authorities last week imposed an indefinite ban on travel outside of the city to contain the spread of the virus.
Joanna said she was “very worried” for herself and her elderly father’s safety.
“It’s quite scary here. There’s all kinds of rumours online and there’s a shortage of medical supplies.
“If we go outside, we cannot buy masks anywhere. There’s also a shortage of food. A lot of shelves are empty.
“And all public transportation has stopped. Even motor vehicles are banned.”
Her father was a New Zealand permanent resident, but did not want to leave the country at this stage, she said.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade has received a small number of requests for consular assistance from New Zealanders in Wuhan City and Hubei Province, and the embassy in Beijing is providing assistance to these individuals and families.
A spokesperson said that for privacy reasons, Mfat did not comment on individual cases.
There are currently 21 New Zealanders registered as being in Wuhan City on SafeTravel.—RNZ
