NINE-DAY LOCKDOWN GAP PLUGGED
For the first nine days of the coronavirus lockdown, the Government was telling people to stay home and made it look like a legal requirement but it wasn't, the High Court has been told.
The New Zealand Law Society has supported the first part of a High Court challenge Wellington lawyer Andrew Borrowdale has brought about the legal basis for parts of the lockdown.
The society's lawyer, Tim Stephens, said the Government purported to describe a legal situation - that people had to go home and stay home - but it was wrong about the way it characterised it.
It did not formally stop visiting people in their homes or being in public spaces if social distancing was maintained, he said.
The Government did not get it right in the first health order on March 24 but it did get it right nine days later when a second order was made, after questions were raised about the legal basis for what was being done, Stephens said. People acted with the best of intentions but perfection was not achieved.
"It was always open to the director-general of health to do it the right way and he got there in the end," Stephens said.
The law society has been allowed to make submissions to assist the court in the case that Borrowdale brought against director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield and the attorney- general. Borrowdale's counsel, Tiho Mijatov, told the court some announcements, including from Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern and Bloomfield, went further than the legal orders permitted.
The ends did not justify the means and the emergency did not create the power to make all the restrictions that were made, he said. Even if the first order was valid, what was imposed by public pronouncement went further than the order allowed.
Mijatov said Borrowdale acknowledged that if the restrictions had a basis in law they could be justifiable limits to rights under the Bill of Rights Act.
The Crown faced some close questioning from the judges over how the terms of the coronavirus lockdown were communicated to the nation. The Crown's lawyer, Victoria Casey, QC, said that early on in the coronavirus pandemic response it was recognised that announcements should be made by the prime minister, even if Bloomfield, or medical officers of health made decisions.
Casey said there was a difference between public health advice and directions with legal backing.
If the court thought the advice amounted to legal requirements, then Bloomfield had the power to impose those, even orally, Casey said. The hearing is expected to last about three days.
