Legal review tests legality of lockdown
Hearing before three High Court judges considers if citizens’ rights were breached
Alawyer challenging the legality of New Zealand’s coronavirus lockdown said no matter how urgent something was, the Government must still obey the law.
A judicial review into whether the lockdown was legal began in Wellington yesterday, with members of the public pouring in to the courtroom to hear the arguments.
The Criminal Bar Association and the Auckland District Law Society have joined forces with Wellington lawyer Andrew Borrowdale to determine whether director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield had the legal authority under the Public Health Act to effectively shut the country down and to order people to stay at home unless they had good reason for being out.
The three-day hearing started in the High Court at Wellington yesterday before a panel of three judges, including Chief High Court Judge Susan Thomas.
Barrister for Borrowdale, Tiho Mijatov, said if the lockdown restrictions had a basis in law, he would accept they were justified.
But no matter “how well meaning, how necessary or how urgent” a measure was, the Government is ruled by the law.
There was “both general and ancient authority” to support that a government cannot take any restriction action without having “a positive basis in law”, he said.
The public announcements made by the Prime Minister and others “requiring us to do things on pain of enforcement by the police” breached New Zealanders’ rights, he said.
Mijatov quoted from Jacinda Ardern’s March 23 press conference, during which she announced the country would go into lockdown, highlighting her use of the words “enforcement” and her summary of what “will” happen and what people “must” do.
“It’s unmistakable that the Prime Minister was telling all people in New Zealand what they had to do.
“I’m not challenging the innocuous statements where the Ministry of Health puts up a meme and says ‘wash your hands’ ... I’m challenging the statements where the Prime Minister tells the nation ‘here’s what has to happen and there will be no tolerance if it doesn’t happen’.”
Crown Law advice — leaked during the lockdown to Newstalk ZB — suggested Bloomfield did not have the required authority to impose lockdown, which would throw into question all arrests made during it.
Attorney General David Parker has insisted the leaked Crown Law advice was a draft copy, even though it had the same serial number as the advice used by former Deputy Police Commissioner Mike Clement to warn his district commanders.
The hearing continues.
