THE NEWS CONTINUES DURING LOCKDOWN Readers have many questions about the media amid the Covid-19 lockdown. Here we answer them.
It's a massively different world for everyone - and that includes the media. We're right in the middle of it - reporting on Covid-19, but also subject to the Government's rules, regulations and guidelines. Readers have many questions for Stuff, particularly around its newspapers, here we answer some of those.
Are your reporters and visual journalists still out and about, and are you still publishing?
Yes. The media is classified as an essential service - to bring you the latest news, updates and advice regarding Covid-19, and non-virus- related news.
While our reporters and visual journalists have the freedom to travel to/from news coverage, we are bound by the same 'stay home' regulations when not working.
Most of our reporters and visual journalists are working from home, but we have a very small group in the office to cover the major events in several cities and towns. Given a largely empty office, social distancing is easy and effective.
We have amended many working ways to adhere to social distancing and safety measures. These include:
Doing daily internal news conferences via hangouts or other communication channels, rather than face to face; Sending fewer people to press conferences and ensuring they keep their social distance; Doing interviews via hangouts, telephone calls, emails or social media; If face- to-face interviews are unavoidable, wearing safety gear and keeping safe distances; Visuals staff keeping a bigger distance and using longer lenses.
In a nutshell, while we have the responsibility to bring you the news, we acknowledge that no story is worth illness or injury to anyone.
How is Covid-19 affecting the media?
As businesses have had to close, many have stopped advertising. This has a major impact on us.
We have reluctantly reduced the size of our newspapers. However, with fewer advertisements, our pages are more open, so the volume of news, opinion, features and entertainment will not reduce much. Some areas like sport are smaller due to no live sport being played, and that space will be allocated to other sections.
The government has just advised that printed periodicals and non- daily publications are not considered essential services under the news and media designation.
That means that we won't be able to print and deliver our community newspapers and magazines for the next four weeks of the lockdown.
Are newspapers safe to read given the potential of spreading Covid-19?
Our processes, and additional precautions will ensure that the newspaper is delivered in the safest way possible.
The International News Media Association - drawing on research by scientists, experts and the World Health Organisation - is unambiguous in its message: There is no documented incident whereby the Covid-19 virus was transmitted from a print newspaper or magazine.
The reasons for this are several:
Covid-19 lasts longest on smooth, non-porous surfaces. Paper, on the other hand, is incredibly porous. The printing process and ink used add to the sterility of newspapers (remember that people used to eat fish n chips from papers for that very reason). The printing, bagging and stacking process is fully automated. The printing shifts are split - and kept apart - to prevent any cross-infection should anyone become ill.
What about your delivery process?
Given the automation of printing and bagging, hardly any hands touch the bundles until delivery.
A delivery contractor will touch the bagged newspaper only very briefly to pop into your mailbox or drop in the driveway. The contractors have been issued with hand sanitiser, wipes and gloves.
And if you're still concerned, scientist Siouxsie Wiles recommends you give the plastic wrapping around your paper a wipe with household cleaner or dishwashing liquid, then wash your hands ... and get reading.
How can I start or continue to read the news?
To subscribe and have your newspaper delivered to your home, please visit www.mags4gifts.co.nz[http://www.mags4gifts.co.nz]. Print subscribers get free access to our digital editions. To subscribe to the digital edition only, go to www. pressreader.com. For community news, and to stay in touch with your locals, go to www.neighbourly.co.nz/[http://www.neighbourly.co.nz/].
And we have Covid-19 podcasts on stuff.co.nz, where you can also sign up for our Covid-19 newsletter. Lockdown or not, we're here to keep you informed and entertained.
