Covid-19 clusters popping up around NZ
Emerging evidence of Covid-19 clusters where the virus has unwittingly been passed through New Zealand communities before the nationwide lockdown shows that contact tracing measures are working, experts say.
While most of New Zealand’s 368 coronavirus cases have been linked to overseas travel, Ministry of Health officials say there are now several suspected clusters of community transmission.
Marist College, the decile 7 Catholic girls’ school with 759 students in Mt Albert, confirmed it has 16 cases, with 10 teachers including its principal and six students.
And it’s feared that a “handful of students” from two other Auckland schools — Lynfield College and Mount Albert Grammar — could have been exposed to infectious Marist College students after they rode on the same school bus.
The other major cluster emanates from an international Hereford cattle conference in Queenstown, where 15 cases in New Zealand have now been linked.
The Southern District Health Board expects more cases to be confirmed in coming days as a result of exposure at the World Hereford Conference where attendees visited various spots across the South Island between March 9 and 18, with pre- and post-conference tours.
The Herald understands that members of a youth Hereford competition team have now tested positive for Covid-19. They have since returned to their homes across the country. But NZ Hereford said they were “not privy to the identity of the confirmed cases”.
Colin Corney, NZ Hereford’s president, says more than 300 people attended the conference from across North and South America, Europe, Scandinavia, UK and Ireland, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand.
“New Zealand had no travel warnings or restrictions in place before the conference,” Corney says
“The situation did escalate globally during the event, but New Zealand restrictions were not put in place until after the conference closed.”
Other New Zealand cluster fears come from a wedding at Wellington’s Ohariu Valley on March 14 where close contacts are being traced, a US trip by a group of Wellington friends, a rest home in Wellington, and when people on board the Ruby Princess cruise ship visited a Hawke’s Bay winery. Four other possible community transmission cases are linked to Auckland and Wairarapa.
Professor Shaun Hendy, director at Te Punaha Matatini at University of Auckland who has been doing modelling for the Government, says the clusters show for the first time that not all cases can now be linked directly to overseas travel.
Aggressive and rapid contact tracing, testing and isolation measures are critical in fighting the virus’ spread, he says. “Where we’re seeing some of those clusters that have essentially been contained, they’re worrying, but they’re a sign that things are working — we’re actually finding these things.”
