I WANT TO BE ALONE, KIND OF
Joel Maxwell and Virginia Fallon give their opinions on the pros and cons of isolation in the age of the coronavirus lockdown.
--------------------
Joel Maxwell
Who knew that the societal meltdown, when it arrived, would happen more quickly than a literal meltdown? In the end it appears a deep freeze, on average, takes longer to defrost than the duration of our gallop from normality to nationwide lockdown.
Everything - everything - changed in the space of a few weeks.
For me, this weekend will be the first chance to sit down and absorb, catch up mentally, emotionally, on a fortnight-long blast of change. It has been like someone tried to pipe an entire bag of cream into a single eclair: only the cream was anxiety, and the exploding choux pastry my delicious psyche.
Let me start by saying there is nothing funny about coronavirus.
It's just that for a person like me - a battery hen that can't stand being stuck with the flock - there is something deliciously inviting about enforced isolation.
Even before this hellish fortnight, the only things I could legitimately face knocking on my door might be a miniature horse in a funny hat, or a pizza delivery person.
To be honest, the thought that armed police or soldiers might now kick in my door, Taser any house guests and drag them away is a relief. Why did it take a crummy pandemic to get this kind of service for my tax dollar? If anybody drops by over the coming weeks I'll dob myself in to the cops. Some say deep introverts are shy. The truth is that everybody is exhausting in large doses, and nothing shuts down small talk like the sweet lick of stun grenades.
As I write this, there are 368 confirmed coronavirus cases in New Zealand. One person is in intensive care. That number will be out of date by the time you read this, which is the scariest part of this scary part of our shared experience. Nothing stands still now.
In these times, as it has always been, there is nothing more beautiful and soothing than an empty room. It is the blank canvas for my quiet love of blank canvases.
I have joked with my colleagues that, if anything, I have to interact with more people now there is a lockdown.
I made small talk with four strangers this morning outside my local pharmacy, each of us standing on a taped "X", spaced apart in the carpark like we were itching for the next go in some tabloid sports game at school.
Two weeks ago, you could ignore other people when you got a prescription. Now you're all pandemic pals standing around in front of a drive-through window waiting for your pills.
In just two weeks.
Don't get me wrong, I'm an utter introvert, but I still value the decency of people who have the guts to be decent even when we're all a little - or a lot - afraid. So much has changed, and even I have been uplifted by the smiles, warmth and sense of togetherness.
I used to be alone but now I'm just another hermit in the crowd.
Virginia Fallon
It might surprise those who know me but I've always thought I was an introvert.
Ever since a panic attack nigh on 17 years ago, I've preferred my own company best, seeking the lonely places to haunt, my own personal heaven consisting of me, my thoughts and my dog. Hell, as Jean-Paul Sartre said, is other people.
While social interactions can't be totally avoided they can be managed: Crowds are dodged at all costs, friends seen one at a time, and the idle chitchat that makes me itch is actively eschewed.
For most of my adult life, I've thought I don't like people much but all it's taken is a state of emergency to prove me wrong.
For the past week, I've been doing the same as hopefully all New Zealanders - staying inside and away from anyone other than those in their bubbles - and I'm utterly miserable.
Don't get me wrong, I know I'm lucky. I have a home and a job to do from it, I have internet and food and the ability to pay at least half my bills but I'm feeling sorry for myself because the lockdown has revealed something shocking: I quite like humans, some of them anyway.
I used to be a people person.
Pre-attack, I actively sought out people to interact with. I loved being social and pined when I couldn't be.
One winter when my children were babies, I took to sitting on a windowsill in our Christchurch house, staring out at the street until a friend told me I looked like something from Flowers in the Attic.
It was during the same time I would lurk at the front gate in the desperate hope someone, anyone, might be passing and offer something more than a demand for a bottle or burp.
When the kids were older, I joined mother's groups and book clubs and night classes. I thrived on interaction and human company and grabbed any chance I could to meet new people.
Things changed 17 years ago but somewhere in between then and now they must have changed again.
Now, like most other Kiwis, I'd do anything to be able to hug my family but that's a given, isn't it? What has surprised me is the other people I miss.
I miss the ladies at the supermarket who tease me about my habit of entering through the exit. I miss the woman whose dog wrestles with mine at the park and I miss the man whose dog refuses to play with mine at the park.
I miss the old bloke who sits on the bench at the end of my road and only ever says "bloody hell" to whatever I tell him. I miss the elderly woman who always stops her mobility scooter to ask what I'm writing about.
I don't know any of these people's names. I just miss them.
And I hope they're OK.
