BANK CLEARED TO PURSUE ICECREAM GUARANTEE
Bank of New Zealand has won a High Court judgment to call in a personal guarantee given by the former owner of Wellington cheese and icecream maker Zany Zeus.
The business was sold during the Covid-19 alert level 4 lockdown after hitting financial trouble. It had been placed in receivership owing millions of dollars in December 2019.
On April 3 last year, the business and assets were sold to a new company, Zany Zeus 2020 Ltd, for $1.8 million. It employed former owner Michael Matsis, who had given guarantees to BNZ over the business's financial obligations in 2016.
In October, BNZ sued Matsis, claiming the difference between the bank's losses from the sale and the $2m maximum he had guaranteed, plus contractual interest and costs.
The High Court found in favour of the bank, according to a summary judgment by Associate Judge Kenneth Johnston, QC, released on May 19.
Matsis opposed the bank's claim.
His lawyer, Callum Reid, said the receivers, with the consent of BNZ, failed to get the best price in the sale, which caused loss and damage to Matsis.
Reid contended the receivers may have panicked when the initial lockdown was announced, and were "tunnel visioned" in selling at any price, according to the judgment.
Matsis claimed the receivers led him to believe that if he co- operated and worked hard, the bank would not sue him under the personal guarantee. BNZ and receiver Richard Nacey rejected the claim.
BNZ had no direct involvement in the negotiation or sale, although the receivers kept the bank updated about the process, Nacey said.
On March 6 last year, Gerald McDouall, who headed the consortium of investors who bought the company, signed a binding, conditional bid of $3.5m for the business, which the receivers at PwC accepted.
McDouall came back with a price of $1.5m plus stock, about $2m below the conditional offer. The receivers responded with an offer of $1.8m all up, which was accepted in April.
A few hours after the Government announced the lockdown on March 23, McDouall received a call from Nacey, who said the receivers were looking at closing the business down and mothballing the assets.
Nacey asked McDouall how the consortium was going in meeting the offer conditions, and, according to McDouall said, "I am not going to lose my house over this".
Nacey said he did not recall using the phrase 'I am not going to lose my house over this', but he did express concern about the risk of continued trading.
He said that once the lockdown was announced, the receivers were concerned they could potentially face personal liability for trading losses during the receivership.
The revised offer of $1.8m was a good one given the circumstances, he said.
Following the sale, the receivers paid about $1.37m to BNZ.
Judge Johnston said there was no evidence that would make the court conclude the receivers had panicked, or that BNZ had improperly interfered with the receivers' actions.
Costs were reserved.
