In brief
In brief
Lockdown charge An Auckland man is facing charges after being pulled over twice as police start clamping down on people flouting coronavirus lockdown rules. “The person was stopped last night and he was stopped the night before,” Police Commissioner Mike Bush told Newstalk ZB’s Mike Hosking yesterday. “He had no reason to be out there. That does show our people [are on to it]. Unfortunately for him, he wasn’t complying with a number of driving matters ... he wasn’t entitled to have that car or to be out there.” A police spokeswoman said the driver was stopped by the Auckland Motorways police team.
Bear or a beer in window?
Kiwis across the county have being taking part in a nationwide bear hunt to keep children entertained during local walks. However, some have taken their own twist on the idea and decided to place beer bottles and cans on their windowsills to “entertain bored men who are going for a walk”. A Facebook page “Beer in the Window” has been made for people to share their photos. “Beer in the Window is all about giving the adults some entertainment during this worldwide lockdown,” the page wrote. “By the end of this lockdown we will have a beer supplier on board to supply a whole heap of beer to some lucky people who like the page.”
Legal warningEmployers of people working through the Covid-19 lockdown may face prosecution if any of their staff get infected or die of the virus. However, under Health and Safety legislation, David Traylor, lawyer with Dundas Street Employment Lawyers, says an employee doesn’t even have to contract the virus for an employer to be charged — the workplace may in fact just be exposing staff to dangers. As it stands, employers have an obligation under Health and Safety legislation, whereby they need to ensure their staff’s safety as far as reasonably practicable. Essential service employees include those in the medical, emergency, food, healthcare, energy, fuel, waste-removal, internet and financial support industries.
Virus symptomsThe recent emergence of the loss of taste and smell in Covid-19 patients could be a key early symptom and researchers want cases to test. University of Otago’s Department of Food Science sensory scientist Dr Mei Peng said in recent days there were reports that many Covid-19 patients may initially experience a sudden loss of taste and smell. “This could potentially be a key early-warning of their infection.” A new, international research consortium had been hastily formed to research and understand how Covid-19 affects smell and taste function. Peng, a member of the international research team, is now looking for individuals who have either been infected with the coronavirus, or believe they might have been exposed to it. Anyone interested in participating should email Dr Mai Peng at the University of Otago.
TV shows for kidsTVNZ is expanding its kids programming to help keep them entertained during the lockdown. From Monday TVNZ 2 is ramping up the hours it dedicates to children’s programmes. Kids shows will start at 6.30am and run through to 10.30am weekday mornings before reverting to the station’s usual content. At 3pm the kids’ programming resumes with Les Mills Born To Move, a new workout show designed for young children and teens, and runs to 4.30pm.
