PROPERTY MARKET IN STATE OF FLUX
As the housing sector faces the same uncertainty as many others in the wake of the coronavirus lockdown, we look at what homeowners can expect from their biggest asset.
--------------------
The property market hasn't escaped the impact of the coronavirus lockdown, leaving homeowners and potential buyers wondering what it will mean for property prices across the country.
Will they plummet, or will they hold strong? How can you tell if it's a good or bad time to buy or sell in your area?
We put some of your questions to property analytics provider Quotable Value's general manager, David Nagel, to get his opinion.
Why have Dunedin house prices gone up so much, and do you think they will drop? We moved to Christchurch nearly three years ago and want to return, but unfortunately we have been priced out of the market in Dunedin. - Mae
Dunedin's residential market has boomed, while the Christchurch market has stood still over the past three years. Primarily, it's down to supply and demand.
Some massive infrastructure projects in Dunedin have attracted employment and population growth, catching the eye of investors. Plus a shortage of vacant land for new developments has created the shortage in supply.
Christchurch, on other hand, is the most affordable of our main centres, but post quakes it has seen significant sprawl to satellite areas such as Rolleston, Lincoln and Rangiora. This has meant limited value growth, meaning your buying power if returning will have taken a hit.
What are your thoughts about the Twizel/Tekapo area? Some lands are advertised for more than double their RV. Do you think there will be some readjustment there? - Gary
We've previously seen massive value growth in these locations as a ripple effect from the unaffordable Queenstown/Wanaka markets. I expect these markets will be more insulated than the more tourism dependent locations, however the depth of the recession will impact any falling off of values.
It's likely vacant land will be more impacted than improved properties, as most of us will wish to defer making big decisions like building a house during all the uncertainty.
Do you expect to see a higher demand for baches and holiday homes in the wake of travel restrictions? We have already heard of this happening anecdotally - Rachel T
Airbnb operators are reporting high levels of inquiry to 80-85 per cent of pre-Covid-19 levels, which is encouraging. But we've just come out of lockdown and have a long weekend just around the corner.
I'd be cautious if I was seeking to purchase a property and relying on short-term income from Airbnb rental.
Rotorua has experienced good growth in the past three to four years. Are you expecting the property market there to slow or even decline given that Rotorua has a large dependence on tourism? - Russell
Rotorua is potentially a hot spot, given the heavy reliance on tourism. As you say, it has experienced good value growth and its resilience will be determined by its ability to find work for those affected by job losses from the tourism sector.
Wellington property prices were out of control before the lockdown. Do you think they'll pick up where they left off now, or can we expect them to come down? - Michael
In the past two to three years there has been a scarcity of house listings in Wellington, and there's been heavy competition between first-home buyers and investors, particularly at the under $750,000 end of the market. This has forced prices up.
There are still a lot of buyers in Wellington competing for very limited stock, and agents are reporting well-attended open homes with multiple offers at tender time. So don't expect any bargains in the short-term at this end of the market within the Wellington region.
Things could change as we get closer to summer and more stock comes on stream.
I own a property in Nelson. I would like to sell this and buy two rental properties in the Auckland city centre. Do you think the rental market in Auckland city centre will stay strong? - Dan
Central Auckland apartment accommodation will likely be impacted by both tourism and also a reduction in international students. I'd be cautious rushing into this type of investment.
However, I am hearing of insatiable demand for these types of properties currently in Auckland from cashed-up investors and first-home buyers. But will this last as more stock comes on stream?
Given Covid-19 has affected trade in many ways, will new-builds that are taking off, shortly struggle to get the raw building materials from overseas. If yes, does that mean signing up for new-builds is a bit risky at this point? - 600
There is uncertainty around the supply of raw materials for new housing developments, and this will likely impact building costs. But we'll also likely see a fall-off in building consents, ultimately impacting the labour component of new-build costs.
This will take time to be reflected in the market and, in the meantime, make sure you get your purchase contracts thoroughly checked by your lawyer.
With construction of new apartments being a risky proposition now, do you have any comment on land-only valuation in Wellington? - Arty
I believe land will always be a more risky asset purchase than improved properties during uncertain times.
Apartments will also be an asset class seen to be at risk due to the reliance on short-stay rentals. But Airbnb operators are bullish so far, which is good news. It may require more time to bed in the impacts on this sector.
