BORDER OPENS FOR FILM WORKERS
Film workers are among a few thousand people allowed past New Zealand's closed borders amid the Covid-19 lockdown.
This comes as the Government undertakes a review of its current strict border restrictions.
It is understood Economic Development Minister Phil Twyford was given special powers on April 21 to use his discretion to let in key individuals from the screen industry.
These included film bigwigs, including for Avatar blockbuster sequels being made in Wellington, as well as a second film, yet to be announced, that is being made in New Zealand.
Twyford said there were a few thousand exemptions for other reasons but those he had dished out were for other essential workers, for economic reasons, which equalled about 5 per cent of the total exemptions.
During the past month or so, he had approved 22 applications for 154 individuals in the essential workers' category.
He would not say how many were from the film industry and would not talk about specific applications.
However, he cited a specialist person to install a new chairlift at a ski field and an electrical engineer for a geothermal plan, as examples.
A cabinet paper on March 31 outlined the request for exemptions to temporary border restrictions for essential workers and revealed his special discretionary powers.
The document set out case-by- case exemption examples, such as humanitarian workers, but also said it could be applied to any other essential worker identified by the Covid group of ministers, with the power to act.
"But the bar is set very high. Officials look very hard at every application," Twyford said.
"It's not going to be easy for everyone."
Officials advised him that applicants had to meet "critical" criteria that included time sensitivities and having skills and expertise that can not be found in New Zealand.
The applicants also had to prove "significant economic benefit beyond that existing company," he said.
"There has to be a wider economic benefit in terms of jobs or impact in the supply chain."
Everyone who came in to the county had to go into two weeks of managed quarantine, which the Government was paying for.
However, the cost for the screen industry workers had been stumped up by the companies they worked for, he said.
The Government was considering opening up border restrictions and anticipated that numerous people would be coming through, so was looking to set up a way for cost recovery.
A paper with a review of the border policies and settings would go to cabinet within a month, he said.
