APPETITE GROWS FOR FINER THINGS
Supermarket shelves are overflowing with fancy versions of everyday basics, and business owners say demand is growing.
Eftpos data showed supermarket sales soared during the Covid-19 lockdown as people queued to buy essentials. Despite costing almost $7 for 250 grams of butter and three times as much than the cheapest bottle of 1-litre milk, Lewis Road Creamery products flew off shelves during the lockdown.
In the United States, Lewis Road sold its premium New Zealand butter for $10.
The company's managing director, Nicola O'Rourke, said there was growing demand for grass-fed, GMO-free and sustainably produced dairy products, and people were prepared to pay for quality.
Jellyologist co-founder Jessica Mentis said she created her premium jelly line to shake up the classic dessert.
"Jelly hasn't seen any innovation for pretty much 50 years, and [has] been the same recipe of artificial sweeteners and colours and sugar. We've pushed the boundaries on what was traditionally considered a jelly," she said.
The company launched its range of flavours such as raspberry and lime for $3.50, about 3 1/2 times the price of the cheapest jelly, Countdown's own brand, which sells for 90 cents.
University of Auckland Associate Professor Mike Lee, a marketing expert, said the trend of adding premium pricing and branding to commodities such as milk and flour was growing because of the "masstige" marketing strategy, or prestige products for the masses.
"If there's a fancy brand of something, and we can afford it, it makes us feel better about ourselves," he said.
Lee said as long as a company wasn't making false claims, it could market a brand in any way that made it seem more prestigious. "Changing the font or packaging . . . is essentially a cash grab but it's not illegal."
Shyr Godfrey, a co-founder of the nut butter company Forty Thieves, said it was challenging to sell premium versions of staple goods. "We've had [competitors] that have launched competitive products to us but are full of fillers like oil or sugar at a lower price."
She said the company built loyalty by consulting its customers on new flavours and asking them to taste test their creations at the factory. Forty Thieves has a premium and a classic range. A jar of its 415g chai spiced almond butter costs $12. Its classic-range 500g peanut butter costs $8, about double the cheapest alternative at the supermarket.
Godfrey said the lockdown had boosted company sales , which had been selling at New World for about two years.
"We got a lot of calls from supermarkets for more stock because of panic buying."
