TAKING A HARD LOOK AT TRACING TECHNOLOGY
Six months have passed since that eerie day when New Zealand went into level 4 lockdown.
Since then, we have learnt we are dealing with a disease that is unlikely to be quickly eliminated overseas. We also now know, according to the World Health Organisation, that Covid-19 appears to kill about 0.5 per cent of the people it infects.
Should we put cities into a level 3 alert each time there is a breach at the border? Should we risk letting more people in and out of the country?
It must make sense to take stock from time to time - even if it is just to decide we are happy with our current choices.
We can't control other countries' response to the virus, the development of a vaccine or how Covid-19 mutates.
But one thing that is within our control is what level of sacrifice of convenience and privacy we demand from our fellow citizens to ensure outbreaks can be better contained through faster contact tracing. Better contact tracing might allow us to carry on as we are, but with less risk of clusters spreading out of control, or perhaps to make some slightly different decisions about lockdowns or the border.
A step-change in contact tracing will require new technology but in my view the Ministry of Health is not being entirely honest with itself about what that might involve.
Its Covid Tracer app does provide contact details for the 2.4 million people who have downloaded it, and acts as a useful "aide memoire" to help them track their movements.
But the feature that sends automated alerts to people, if they have visited a venue at the same time as someone subsequently diagnosed with Covid, will prove of little benefit. That is because the feature only works if both the infected person and the people who were at the venue at the same time all used the app.
The Covid Tracer app is currently being used to scan into about 1.5 million venues a day.
The Ministry of Health does not appear to have conducted any surveys to estimate how many venues people visit on average each day. That means it cannot estimate how many million scans there would be if everyone was using the app religiously. Without that number, no-one can really know how useful the feature actually is. But say the country's 4 million adults visit a total of 8 million venues each day.
That would imply people were "scanning in" about 19 per cent of the time. Because of the exponential relationship between usage and efficacy, that means the app would only be capable of creating alerts for a meagre 3.5 per cent of contacts that might have occurred in an outbreak. If people visit just one venue a day on average that figure would still rise only to 12 per cent.
Ministry of Health deputy director-general Shayne Hunter does not dispute that analysis.
"We are very focused on making sure we have a good base level contact tracing technology and that we are able to contact 80 per cent of people in 48 hours."
The most important message is for people to keep a record of where they go, he says.
The ministry plans to add a Bluetooth proximity feature to the Covid Tracer app that could create similar automated alerts if people's phones come within a certain distance of each other for a prescribed time and one of them is subsequently diagnosed with Covid. At the same time it is pressing ahead with a further trial of the wearable CovidCard Bluetooth tracer token.
Overall, I am not convinced the ministry has accepted the implication that the Government may face some tough, binary choices. And the temptation in this "fog" may be to delay making difficult calls.
Communications Minister Kris Faafoi's statement - dutifully repeated by the Ministry of Health - that the CovidCard was shown to work in a "controlled environment" in a trial in Nelson and will now be tested in a "real world" scenario in Rotorua, suggests that is the direction with the CovidCard at least. The reality of the trials is pretty much the exact opposite.
That device was shown to work in a "real world" technology trial at Nelson Hospital. Bluetooth signals do not have to obey any rules set down by the local district health board at Nelson Hospital.
That trial appears to have shown the Kiwi-made devices worked far more accurately than smartphone-based Bluetooth solutions developed overseas.
Though the ministry has not yet released its terms of reference, the new Rotorua trial appears mainly designed to test how people would feel about voluntarily wearing CovidCards.
Given there would be no significant benefit to anyone from any Bluetooth proximity device unless its use was almost nationwide or the virus was known to be circulating in their community, that is not something the Rotorua trial can realistically test.
Of course, there have been things the ministry has done well. The early communications around numbered alert levels and "bubbles" were terrific. But I fear that six months after level 4, it is easier to keep muddling through.
