COOKING UP A NEW VENTURE ONLINE
With her iPhone on a tripod, a young chef has been able to livestream her baking classes online during the coronavirus lockdown.
Maxine Scheckter is in charge of Sugar Flour in the Wellington suburb of Kilbirnie, where she teaches classes on how to make pastries, bread and other sweet treats.
About 270 people have taken part in her classes online - signing up to learn about making hot cross buns, Portuguese custard tarts, croissants and raspberry cream buns.
To adhere to lockdown restrictions, people attending the classes have ingredients dropped off via contactless delivery.
Scheckter hosts her classes live on Instagram, where people can still ask questions but also bake in their own time.
"I've been wanting to do this for a while but it always got pushed to the bottom of the list."
When the lockdown was announced, Scheckter had a "good half-an-hour freakout" wondering if she could get through it. "The government subsidy, as helpful as it is . . . when you're a business, it's not really enough."
After some "ugly crying", the 24-year-old did some research. She found her online classes and provision of baking ingredients fitted into the essential business category.
"Our first delivery was actually the day before lockdown started."
With her in-person lessons, Scheckter can teach up to 10 people per class but online she can cater for up to 45. Since lockdown began, she has taught six classes.
"It's a bit different because normally, if someone has something not quite right, I can look at what's happening," she said. "Whereas doing it online, I have to pre-empt all the things people might have got wrong so I can tell them ahead of time how to fix it."
Scheckter, who has worked at patisseries in France and the United Kingdom, said she had got lots of positive feedback. "A huge number of people who come to the classes are repeat customers - it gives them something to look forward to. It definitely keeps me busy. I'm really glad I chose to go down this route, rather than shutting up shop."
Her classes will continue throughout alert level three.
