MAORI FLAVOURS GOING GLOBAL
Launching a Maori drink range three days before the Covid-19 lockdown began in New Zealand could have been a death knell for a fledgling business.
That's the challenge Reni Wereta-Gargiulo, Taranaki iwi, faced when she brought out her Atutahi drink range in March 2020.
But rather than simply ride out the lockdown, she used it to think big - international big.
Now, with the help of a $50,000 High-Value Nutrition grant, she's getting ready to ship her native drinks offshore.
Wereta-Gargiulo owns Kiwi Kai, a Maori kai cafe, and had been selling her kawakawa drink at the Nelson market for years.
She decided to put it into cans along with two more flavours, partnering with Kombucha Bros.
The drinks were named Atutahi after her grandfather, with the name chosen by her Taranaki whanau who also provide tikanga support.
The drinks take native leaves with medicinal values - kawakawa, kumarahou and horopito - and mix them with other flavours and light carbonation.
Despite launching as lockdown hit, they had become popular - being sold in cafes around Nelson and online, as well as at local conferences, Wereta-Gargiulo said.
They were also finalists in the New Zealand Artisan Awards 2020.
Then the business received the High-Value Nutrition grant, which helped it to carry out market research with a view to exporting. It would also be presenting the results of that research at the 2021 Foodnomics Conference in September.
"We're really appreciative of that funding - it means a lot to us and our whanau."
The business was seeking retailers in Australia and Singapore, while also looking to roll out into supermarkets in New Zealand, she said.
All this came after using the lockdown as a chance to look at opportunities, she said. "I had time up my sleeve . . . I had time to look into what I needed to do."
The business brought in experts, helped by the grant, to do research, and had connected with the University of Otago to help with product development.
"Rather than me try and do everything and taking 10 times as long, I'm bringing in experts now."
Working with others, including in the Maori tourism sector, had been a real game-changer, she said. "What it's allowed us to do is to give us a good and professional fast track to the export world."
Two new flavours and low sugar offerings are also being developed for the expanding business, and it was bringing glass bottles alongside the cans, as it used the Kiwi Kai business to drive Atutahi's growth.
"Every time someone buys a hangi it goes towards those drinks."
The business was for the grandchildren, she said. "Here you go, kids."
