LIVES BEFORE LEGAL TECHNICALITIES, COURT TOLD
The Crown is defending Director- General of Health Ashley Bloomfield against an allegation that he didn't have the powers to make the coronavirus pandemic lockdown orders he did.
Wellington lawyer Andrew Borrowdale has personally taken a case alleging parts of the lockdown were unlawful.
Part of his criticism is based on a claim that Bloomfield had taken steps that should have been left to medical officers of health in districts throughout New Zealand.
But in the High Court at Wellington yesterday the Crown's lawyer, Victoria Casey QC, said that the Health Act 1956 gave the director-general the same powers as the medical officers.
The powers were designed to be exercised in an emergency and were properly used in March and afterwards, she said.
Borrowdale had crossed the line into a field outside his expertise, suggesting that the restrictions should have applied only to 205 people on March 25, and perhaps their close contacts, she said.
His approach would protect some rights at the cost of significant loss of life, disproportionately affecting Maori and Pasifika.
If New Zealand had to return to lockdown it would be done under a new law passed since the pandemic began.
The new legislation was no indication that the original emergency powers were defective, Casey said.
A rare full court of three High Court judges in Wellington is hearing Borrowdale's challenge, which is due to end today.
Borrowdale's lawyer, Tiho Mijatov, said it would be wrong if a more permissive and generous approach was taken to interpreting the law because it had been an emergency.
There were also rights at stake, he said.
One of the arguments is that Bloomfield overstepped his powers in ordering everyone in all districts to stay home except for essential purposes.
Mijatov said the law Bloomfield acted under was intended for medical officers of health acting on a district-by-district basis, not the director-general acting on a national basis.
Bloomfield's orders were for the population generally when they should have been for specified individuals or groups of individuals, he said.
Mijatov agreed that the Government did not have the legislative tools to do what it needed to deal with the emergency.
He also agreed that what was done was necessary. He was not trying to second guess the wisdom of the measures taken, it was really a question of whether it was lawful or not, he said.
The final part of Borrowdale's case was that for the first nine days of the lockdown the power of the medical officers of health, and perhaps Bloomfield, to decide which essential businesses and services could remain open had been wrongly delegated to unnamed officials at the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
"No matter how desirable, necessary or urgent, it still has to be lawful," Mijatov said.
