Predictions in a pandemic — nothing can be pinned down
The first six months of 2020 introduced Kiwis to Covid-19, saw us forced into a month-long lockdown, then brought us liberation — before a border blunder and a renewed spate of cases caught in quarantine.
What will the rest of the year bring?
“While you’d have to be pretty brave to predict the future beyond the end of this year with much certainty, I think some of the biggest uncertainties for New Zealand have now been removed,” Otago University epidemiologist Professor Michael Baker said.
“People can feel very confident that elimination can be sustained.”
Modelling has suggested that new cases will continue to trickle in at a rate of about 12 each week, on the back of travel to the country rising from 1000 arrivals a week in mid-May to about 2500 now.
More travellers are also coming from countries dealing with surges in Covid-19 — notably the United States and India — as the pandemic surges around the world.
Baker pointed out that New Zealand was in rare company, not just because it had avoided a major outbreak and effectively achieved elimination, but had been spared the sorts of setbacks that had been seen in other high-performing countries such as Singapore, South Korea, China, and now Australia.
That wasn’t to say New Zealand’s response was perfect. It was last week revealed that 51 of 55 travellers given compassionate exemptions to leave isolation early had done so without being tested. And a just-released major audit found New Zealand’s managed isolation and quarantine facilities were under “extreme stress” and unable to respond to increasing demands as more Kiwis returned home.
Baker felt the way data was officially reported also wasn’t doing us any favours, as the Government didn’t formally classify cases detected at the border as different from community transmissions.
New Zealand should also be running simulations of different outbreak scenarios to test its contact tracing capacity, he said.
The Ministry of Health can trace about 5000 contacts in a day — a job made easier by the fact more than half a million Kiwis have signed up to the delayed NZ Covid Tracer app.
Ensuring the health authorities could swiftly stamp out any further incursions would be crucial before New Zealand looked to tweak its border arrangements.
“There are two big questions we face here. One is how we might increase the volume of people coming through quarantine, while figuring out how to manage that in the most effective way,” he said. “The other, of course, is when and whether we allow quarantine-free travel to certain countries. It seems certain that there will be other countries that we can open up for.
“Those would be countries like the Pacific Islands, that have never had the virus, or countries that have eliminated it, like Fiji, Taiwan, parts of Australia, and hopefully soon, all of Australia.”
For that to happen, any countries we extended our bubble to would need a shared definition of elimination — with a built-in requirement of rock-solid surveillance systems that detected new cases as they turned up.
“Another thing we could do during this period is carry out a review of our response, and establish a new and dedicated national agency for public health.”
For most other countries, Baker summed up the outlook in one word: grim.
The pandemic was expected to take years to work its way around the globe, and it so far hadn’t deviated from the trajectory scientists predicted back in January.
“We are learning more about it, and there are some big unknowns — but we expect that it is programmed to infect around 60 per cent of the world’s population,” he said.
“This is not millions, but billions of people. Estimates are converging on it killing about 1 per cent of the population, so that’s a burden of more than 20 million people who may die from it in the next few years.”
At the same time, scientists were trying to answer some of the most pressing questions around Covid-19 and immunity.
One was that there may be some cross-immunity from other coronaviruses that might protect more people than we thought.
Another was that there was very little immunity in the population, which could see the virus ultimately infect 60 to 70 per cent of people on the globe.
A third hypothesis was that there may be long-lasting immunity among people who have been exposed to it.
“Yet another view is that there isn’t, and the virus just keeps circulating, and coming back in waves year after year, cutting a swathe through the population and killing about 1 per cent each time it goes through,” he said.
“We are talking here about older people, or those with co-morbidities, who make up quite a large proportion of the world’s population.”
