PARTIES UNMASK POST-LOCKDOWN PLANS
The cleft between those New Zealanders who wish to reduce Covid restrictions and push open the doors of the country and those who would prefer to remain safe, but shut, is about to be widened.
The gap will be between those who want a decent local summer to be guaranteed - or as guaranteed as it can be with the Delta variant of Covid-19 - and those who wish to travel or have others travel here.
The ACT Party yesterday released its Covid 3.0 plan, which wasn't particularly detailed, but its main thrust was that New Zealand needs to live with Covid and all Government efforts need to be marshalled towards ensuring that can be done as safely as possible.
Leader David Seymour has also been increasingly pushing the line that the obsessive focus from Government on Covid is coming at the expense of other sorts of illness and social ills, worsened by lockdowns.
Following on that, the National Party today will release its plan for New Zealand to re-emerge from Covid. National's plan would mean that Kiwis desperately hoping to get back to New Zealand would be back by Christmas, said National leader Judith Collins.
The party's Covid-19 Response spokesman, Chris Bishop, said that fully vaccinated Kiwis would be very pleased with the plan, which is expected to be lengthy, detailed and cover the whole gamut of a reopening strategy. That includes testing, contact tracing, health workforce, borders: the lot.
It comes at a crucial time for Collins, who has been casting around for an issue that can really gain traction with the public.
Asked about National's indication of opening by Christmas, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern hewed back to keeping New Zealand's domestic lifestyle safe.
"Our priority is New Zealanders having the best summer possible," Ardern said, noting that lifting restrictions too soon could lead to more big outbreaks. It was a familiar refrain.
"What's really key is making sure that what's happening domestically gives every New Zealander who is already here as much freedom as possible," she said.
In other words, the Government will look after New Zealanders who are here and try to give everyone a non-locked down summer break. Then it will fully level with the public that there will be some amount of Covid in the community as we open up to the world, and the Government has decided the trade-offs around that are acceptable.
It is, in effect, a repeat of Christmas 2020, where a rubbish year of lockdowns and disruptions meant that a carefree and open summer was arguably psychologically more important than usual. There will definitely be a lot of New Zealanders keen for that, and probably a fair few happy to leave reopening to be 2022's problem.
That said, the National approach - based on what we know about it - will most likely be a sound political strategy. The party is betting this strategy will help it overcome its current challenges and ride a wave of public frustration over lockdowns and a lack of clarity from the Government.
The answer to an awful lot of questions seems to be that the Government is working on it.
Whether National's is a sound health strategy is more debatable and depends on who you talk to. As with Covid-19 in general many peoples' responses to policy ideas are shaped by their own risk profile and those they love.
And there is definitely risk for Collins, Bishop and National in this approach. Remember Todd Muller who, for a brief period, was National's leader? He was talking about reopening to Australia and even to China. He left the building, Covid re-entered the country and that talk was quickly scotched.
The currently suspended trans- Tasman bubble - also pushed along significantly by the National Party - has also left many feeling burned. The politics of all of this aren't easy.
And a lot of these questions depend on how they are phrased. Do you want New Zealand to safely reopen to the world? Probably a decent majority would say yes. Do you want New Zealand to reopen if it means 500 deaths from Covid next year? Many would start to say no, even though it is about the annual death rate from the flu which the public barely worried about prior to this pandemic. What about 1000?
What will be refreshing today, and is good in general, is that the Government will finally be challenged on some bedrock principles of its Covid response. For too long all the parties have lined up behind the style of government-by- epidemiologist. Now, factors other than health will be more broadly canvassed and trade-offs around the risk of Covid versus other risks will start to be debated more openly. That can only be good for our politics. Particularly on an issue that is likely to sharply divide the public.
