HEALTH CHECK
The spread of Covid-19 brought unprecedented change to the housing market. But after lockdown, buyers and sellers defied the forecasts of doom, and real estate came to life again. JAMES WILSON tracks an unpredictable market
When the last Oneroof Property Report came out, at the start of March, few would have guessed that the housing market was a few short weeks away from a total shutdown. Back then there was momentum in the market and economists were predicting house prices would rise. But by the end of March, the momentum was lost and experts feared the worst, forecasting price falls of 10 to 20 percent.
The word “unprecedented” has been used a lot to describe the Covid-19 crisis. Cliche or not, it’s a word that aptly sums up the impact of the lockdown period. Never before in New Zealand’s history had the property market and the framework that supports it been shut down.
While it’s too early to tell what the full impact of Covid-19 will be on the housing market, we do know it’s more important than ever to focus on the collation, analysis and correct application of available data to ensure that any decisions made are from an informed position. Conversely, the risk of relying on misleading or incomplete data, or data that may be biased towards a particular outcome, has never been greater.
Before we dive into the data, let’s take a look at how the market performed once the Alert Level Four lockdown came into force on March 26, and in the weeks after restrictions were eased and the country returned to normal.
1. Sales volumes drop: Confidence is king when it comes to the housing market, and sales volumes for April were well down on the same period last year. Much of this can be attributed to lockdown restrictions such as no open homes, no valuations, and no physical auctions — although in the initial weeks of lockdown, there was a lot of uncertainty which fed into predictions of house price falls and a severe economic recession.
2. Vendors sit on the sidelines: Listing numbers as the country moved out of lockdown in May were down on the same period last year, as homeowners took a wait-and see approach to the market. This in turn creates heightened demand for the stock that does come to market.
3. Interest rates cut: One of the immediate responses to Covid-19 was a cut to the Official Cash Rate, which most high street banks passed on to customers. This reduction allowed those who were already looking to buy before lockdown to stretch themselves.
4. Pent-up demand: The drop in new listings and low interest rates, combined with
