The index measures value change since March 25, with the baseline set at 1000...
The index measures value change since March 25, with the baseline set at 1000 for every region
When Covid-19 hit, the market stepped back and took stock. After the level 4 lockdown ended, the city rode a growing wave of pent-up demand, with transactions rising to pre-lockdown levels. Overall, the Auckland market is flat, although some parts of the city have dipped.
There’s a lot of caution in Hamilton, with investors, who were really active pre-Covid, now sitting on the sidelines. First home buyers have plugged that gap. In the last couple of months value growth has been positive, although small.
Tauranga has a lot of sub-market variation. In places like Mt Maunganui, where the higher end holiday home market is prevalent, values are soft. But overall, the market, which is supported by a lot of first home buyer stock, is back in positive territory.
Wellington is a public sector town - and this quality has protected it from the volatility seen in other housing markets. Low listing numbers and sustained buyer demand have driven its bounceback from the depths of the complete market shutdown during the lockdown.
Christchurch went into lockdown flat and has come out flat. It’s not a market dominated by any particular buyer group but that doesn’t preclude change, especially if other pressures come into play, such as unemployment or a secondary outbreak of the coronavirus.
Queenstown has seen the largest decline post-lockdown. The fear factor is prevalent among a lot of buyer groups and there has been a massive drop off in high value transactions. The data points to potential volatility ahead - there’s a high share of vacant sites.
Dunedin came into lockdown hot, but it was a market driven heavily by investors, a buyer group that has retreated. First home buyers have not stepped in to fill the gap as much as in other locations so we’ve seen since a softening of values post Covid. It’s too early to tell how long this may last.
