LEGAL CHALLENGE TO EARLY LOCKDOWN MEASURES FAILS
The Wellington lawyer who personally challenged the legality of early coronavirus lockdown measures has lost his appeal.
Andrew Borrowdale had a measure of success in the High Court, which found that some very early lockdown pronouncements had gone further than health orders permitted. He appealed against other parts of his case being dismissed.
However, in a judgment issued yesterday, the Court of Appeal turned down his appeal.
Borrowdale maintained that the restrictions were inconsistent with freedoms of association, movement and assembly under the Bill of Rights Act, but the Court of Appeal found that the limitations were justifiable to prevent disease and protect society.
The court also ruled against a submission that the director-general of health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield, had wrongly delegated his responsibility to decide which businesses had to close during the lockdown that started in late March 2020.
The court said a list of essential businesses that could stay open was prepared by officials and approved by Bloomfield.
In addition, Bloomfield had provided the principles used to decide which businesses were essential.
It appeared that some government ministers may have acted without authority when allowing exemptions for businesses to open, the court said, but this was a separate question to whether Bloomfield had acted unlawfully.
Bloomfield did not appear to have been involved in exemptions that ministers granted for the Tiwai Point aluminium smelter and other large industrial plants to stay open, and for the maintenance of stadium turfs, bowling greens, golf courses and nurseries.
The case was argued on the narrow basis that Bloomfield had wrongly delegated his powers to officials, not that the ministers acted beyond their lawful powers, the court said.
The court did not follow the usual practice of ordering Borrowdale to pay costs to the winning party.
"Dr Borrowdale and his counsel have provided an important service to the community by presenting the court with the issues that we have addressed. In those circumstances, we decline to make any order for costs," it said.
Borrowdale took the case in a personal capacity. He has a PhD in law from the University of Cambridge, and was a law lecturer at the University of Canterbury.
He worked as a parliamentary counsel until 2015, with a spell as a legislative drafter for the Irish Government. He has written or co-written several textbooks on company and commercial law.
