LAND BOUGHT FOR $100M BUSINESS HUB
A $100 million business hub north of Wellington is one step closer with the Covid-19 lockdown becoming the latest impetus for companies and state agencies to find bases outside the capital's CBD.
Developers Willis Bond & Co bought the former AgResearch centre in Wallaceville, Upper Hutt, in December for an undisclosed sum with plans to convert it into 40,000 square metres of commercial space.
Director David McGuinness said there had been significant interest in work spaces that would allow people living outside of Wellington to work closer to home, and for resilient locations that were more likely to be operational after a natural disaster. Interest had been growing since the Kaikoura earthquake and was renewed following the lockdown.
"We've seen a growing demand for flexible options outside the city that complement CBD offices, offer more green space, support both collaborative and socially-distanced working, and can operate as a genuine Plan B site option during emergency events."
Plans for the facility, to be known as the Blue Mountains Campus, include three new buildings designed to 130 per cent of the new building standard, and the refurbishment and strengthening of three existing buildings. Amenities including a cafe, co- working spaces, meeting rooms, outdoor spaces, and running and cycling loops were also in the plans.
The site had an "excellent resilience profile", being at low risk from tsunami, liquefaction, ground shaking and slips, McGuinness said.
The campus would be used by day- to-day staff, but could be used by tenants as a base for essential staff and management during emergency events.
McGuinness said Willis Bond was in discussions with possible private and state tenants. Work would begin once negotiations were finished. The construction and refit project would take about 2 1/2 years.
He said the campus was being established as a contender to house one of the Government's regional state service hubs - to counter tightening office spaces in main centres and to offer flexibility to staff.
Last September State Services Minister Chris Hipkins said a Labour-led Government would be ready to "hit the go button" on the hubs early in their next term if re- elected, but did not give a timeline.
Yesterday, Hipkins told Stuff, "progress was continuing on the Government's plan to increase the regional-office space footprint. We're not yet in a position to make further comment".
