WHY IS LOCKDOWN SO STRICT?
New Zealand is now days into alert level 4, but there is still some confusion over what is allowed as part of the nationwide coronavirus lockdown.
While people seem to have (mostly) accepted the need to stay local, questions remain about the restrictions.
Police have been given "unprecedented" powers to crack down on Kiwis flouting the rules, so if in doubt, it's best not to do it.
Here's a breakdown of why the restrictions are in place.
Why do we need this lockdown?
While we all know the lockdown is to help stop the spread of Covid-19, perhaps not everyone realises the extent of what could happen in New Zealand if these measures were not taken.
Recent research suggests up to 80,000 Kiwis could die if the virus is not contained.
The modelling from the University of Auckland's Te Punaha Matatini shows that within 400 days, about 89 per cent of the population would be infected, far exceeding the capacity of our hospital system to cope.
Why can't I go for a drive if I'm on my own?
Travelling between areas is now banned for everyone except essential workers because unnecessary travel increases the risk of spreading coronavirus from one area to another.
You can use your private vehicle to access a local park or beach if unable to get there by foot or bike. This type of driving must be very local and not for across-town travel.
This is to stop large groups of people gathering at popular parks and beaches.
Another reason driving is not encouraged is because of the risk of crashes, which could put emergency services at risk.
About 7pm on Thursday, a driver died in a single vehicle crash in Northland's Mangapai.
Northland police said in a Facebook post the drive was needless: "Sadly this was not a necessary journey during level 4 lockdown."
Why can't my kids use the local playground?
While children are cooped up at home, parents have been frustrated and even coming to blows over playgrounds being shut.
The reason playgrounds are closed is because of the risk of spreading coronavirus through touching shared surfaces, which may not have been cleaned.
If you think picking up Covid-19 from another surface is far-fetched consider this: A new report on the cruise ship Diamond Princess found traces of coronavirus on surfaces up to 17 days after passengers left.
Why can't I let other people play with my dog if I keep two metres away?
Taking your dog to a dog park or the local beach may seem like a good way to pass the time in lockdown, but dog owners are advised to keep their dogs on a leash.
There is a risk animals could transfer the virus, such as by multiple people patting their head. Both dogs and cats should be contained within a household's lockdown bubble.
Whether or not pets can get Covid-19 is still unclear, with reports from Hong Kong of a dog with a mild infection.
Anyone walking an animal is also encouraged to avoid touching communal surfaces, and to wash their hands or use hand sanitiser after going out.
Why can't I swim, surf, fish, hunt or go mountain biking?
While swimming, surfing, fishing, hunting and mountain biking may seem like a great solo activity, the official advice is to avoid these activities, although some surfers are prepared to risk arrest for a surf.
The main reason for this is because, if you get into trouble, you could use up scarce resources, such as ambulance crews or the rescue helicopter, getting out of it.
You could also put the likes of Coastguard volunteers at risk
The volunteers would have to come well within two metres of you to pull you from the sea or give you mouth-to-mouth.
Any injuries could also put a strain on the health system, where healthcare workers are already under pressure.
With this in mind, ACC is also encouraging people to stay safe in the home, especially if gardening or doing DIY.
"Gardening, DIY and other home-related activities make it more hazardous than the workplace, our roads, and even the places we play sport.
"In 2018 more than 1 million injuries occurred in and around the home," ACC said.
The organisation advises people to use safety gear such as closed shoes and protective eyewear, and ensure ladders are angled correctly on a firm surface.
With more children at home than normal, ACC is also advising parents to have someone supervising the kids, and to keep tools, sharp objects, paints and solvents out of reach.
Can I drop off some food to my loved ones?
Yes, you can drop off groceries to nearby family, friends or neighbours, such as those over 70.
This should only be done if they live locally.
Food should be dropped at the door and you should not enter the house, to protect the other people from exposure to Covid-19.
Thankfully, supermarkets and dairies remain open with new rules to ensure physical distancing.
So what can I do during the lockdown?
While there are a lot of restrictions during the lockdown, there are also plenty of things you can do.
Children are encouraged to go on a teddy bear hunt around their neighbourhood, with people putting bears and other soft toys in their windows for youngsters to spot.
Other good uses of your time include learning to cook or brewing a beer, although Kiwi experts also advise people to eat and sleep well to stay healthy.
Fortunately, there are also plenty of good podcasts to listen to while you're in your bubble.
