'RED' LIGHT WELCOMED BY CHAMBER
Auckland businesses have three weeks to repair some of the damage inflicted by the Covid-19 lockdown, says Auckland Business Chamber chief executive Michael Barnett.
Details of the new Covid-19 "traffic light system" were revealed yesterday afternoon, ahead of its introduction on Friday.
Most of the country will start in "orange", apart from parts of the North Island including Auckland and Northland which will be at red. None of the country will be in green.
At orange, venues and businesses that require vaccine passes can generally operate normally, with no capacity limits or seating requirements. Venues that choose to not require vaccine passes will face more severe restrictions.
At red, venues can still open if they require vaccine passes, but will need to have capacity limits and seating requirements.
A payment of up to $24,000 would be available to businesses to help them navigate the transition to the new system.
"I think the transition payment is going to be extremely welcome especially for the small-medium business," said Barnett. "It's not going to fix 100 days of lockdown, but it's going to help."
While he was positive about the new system, Barnett said Christmas was not shaping up well for many Auckland businesses.
"They've got three weeks from now to the end of the year when basically Auckland goes into close- down mode again, so they've got three weeks to try and convert that into fixing some of the problems that they've been delivered over the last 100 days of lockdown."
There was now some certainty, and it was up to businesses to make the most of the extra freedoms available, he said.
"There's more opportunity for activity, if you're prepared to use the environment that's been provided.
"So it's going to be a case of, if you can work within the boundaries of dealing with vaccinated and unvaccinated people and make the most of it, you're going to have greater opportunities."
The promise of a review in a couple of weeks, with the potential to go to orange, provided some definition of the environment the country was now operating in.
"The platform's been delivered now, it's more of an enabler, and it's up to business now to be able to convert that into the best opportunity for them to operate."
James Carlisle, co-founder of the Vivo hair salon chain, welcomed yesterday's announcement and said it was as expected.
"Frankly, we're just relieved to be open after 100 days of being closed. Anything that doesn't involve us closing is really good news.
"Orange is a little bit less restrictive, but from a business point of view it's very similar to red," Carlisle said.
