NORTH IN ITS OWN BUBBLE
The morning of the second lockdown, traffic streamed towards the tunnel at the head of Auckland’s Northern Motorway.
At 9.15pm the night before, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern had called a surprise press conference to tell the nation Covid-19 was back. Auckland would go into level 3 lockdown at noon. The rest of the country shifted to level 2.
The Herald’s project, The Road Ahead, had started in Bluff to map our life in a pandemic world and intended to finish at Cape Reinga. We began when there were no cases and we would finish on tenterhooks, on the alert for an enemy that cannot be seen.
Our path lay to the north. We didn’t stop until we were clear of Auckland, and when we did, it was like stepping back into a world we left almost four months ago.
In Kaiwaka, at the excellent bakery and cafe La Nonna Italian Bakery, customers were once again doing the Covid-19 shuffle-dance. Suddenly, it was one-way traffic through doors, queues with orderly gaps, movement designed to create and maintain personal bubbles, coughing into elbows.
Ilia Petro, 44, who owns the business, took care to keep at least a table distance away when saying: “Things have changed in 24 hours. Nobody can predict. There are a lot of unknowns out there. Even the politicians don’t know.”
Asked the difference between the day before and that day, Petro says: “When you’ve got a big mortgage, that’s what you think about.”
In Maungaturoto, a large community noticeboard carries the message: “Take care of yourself and look after each other.”
Carolyn Skelton, 66, of nearby Whakapirau, is at the Maungaturoto Op Shop. “I come here every Wednesday. This morning was a question as to whether we would open.”
At noon, Northland became an island and Auckland a quarantine facility. The roadblocks were up at Te Hana and the Bombay Hills.
Turning north from Paparoa through the rarely travelled back road, Mike Gibson, 66, is siphoning off 1000 litres of milk to feed calves.
“I did expect it would happen. People are not doing as they were told. I don’t think [the Government] is tough enough. You can’t afford to be taking any risk.”
The madness of panic shows its first signs on the outskirts of Whangārei. From the Maungakaramea turnoff, it should be 15 minutes to Whangārei. The day of the second lockdown, State Highway 1 was jam-packed and it took almost 90 minutes to make the journey.
There were Aucklanders heading north, those living outside Whangārei who felt a sudden compulsion to do “just my regular weekly shop”, those who felt an urge to be tested. At the Northern Advocate office, editor Rachel Ward was working out priorities for the next day’s coverage. She had read the news online the evening before and recalled it brought “instant awakeness and anxiety”.
The newsroom phones had gone quiet that morning as, by Ward’s reckoning, locals spilled out of homes and workplaces “rushing around getting food, hand sanitiser, getting tested”.
Speed matters when meeting audience demands in a developing event. What was needed for those travelling to Auckland? And what about the location of testing stations? “People had lost sight of that sort of thing.”
Amid all that, there was “not getting caught in the wider craziness”.
Over at Pak’nSave, Wilmarie Jansen, 34, was shopping with Bart-Jan, 2. “I’m doing my shopping now so if it goes to level 4 I don’t need to leave home.” There are a few things she stocked up on — nappies, dog food, frozen food — but there were definitely others “panic buying”, she says.
There was less need to keep space between customers at the Towai Tavern, about 30 minutes north of Whangārei. Jackie Shelford, 55, works behind the bar although on fewer hours after passing traffic reduced and tourists stopped coming.
Shelford leaned on the tap and poured beer. “You’re spending your life savings now, just to get by,” she says. “Which is pretty sad though, because you think you have a nest egg at the end of your years of working.”
In Kawakawa, Russell Allen, 67, presides over The Cave, a trove of knick-knacks, power tools, bikes and assorted detritus of life waiting for a new life with new owners.
“I was in disbelief to start with,” he says of the return of the virus. “I thought we were okay. I thought we had done everything right. It was bound to happen though, wasn’t it?”
Of all we spoke to, there would be very few surprised the virus had found a way in. No matter how good your roof is, water will get through if the rain is strong enough.
Dark clouds fat with foreboding shadowed us north but disappeared as we descended into the Bay of Islands. Paihia is usually quiet during winter but the recent domestic tourism boom had papered over cracks exposed by the border closure.
It had been a welcome bump during a traditionally slow period. Now, though, the Island of Northland was isolated from making a living.
Joy Moore, 77, provides information to tourists at the Paihia Wharf information kiosk with colleague Maxine Whauteri, 64.
“It’s going to change even more now,” Moore says. “Horror” was the word she chose to describe her reaction to the second lockdown.
That morning, after staying at my home outside Kerikeri, videographer Mike Scott and I talked about getting a Covid-19 test. Yes, we had taken care in our travels but was it really conscious, Covid-19 aware care?
I had obsessively scanned every QR code, earning amazement and occasional derision, but that was only good for after the virus had been passed on.
Also, Mike had woken with a cold.
At Kerikeri’s Turner Centre, Northland DHB staff efficiently ordered those who had turned up for testing then bundled us through. The swab went up my nose and near out the back of my head but it wasn’t unpleasant until it was removed. If it felt like anything, it’s that tear-inducing feeling of accidentally sniffing up a mosquito.
Up the road from the testing station was Kerikeri Primary School, where my youngest child is in Year 5. The night of the second lockdown announcement, principal Dr Sarah Brown had been at home when text messages started rolling in: “Are you watching the television?”
Ardern had yet to finish speaking before Brown turned to preparing the email that would go out to parents at 8.15am, telling them: “I know many of you will be anxious at this time, we will ensure that school is the safest possible place for your children”.
For Brown, that early communication with the school community was critical. “I wanted to get it out first thing in the morning. When you can show you have a plan in place from the get-go, it gives people a sense of security.”
At mechanics BOI Electrics on nearby Mill Lane, Karl and Nicki Quin, 46 and 51, were wondering at the calm that had descended on the town. The country wasn’t even 24 hours into a return to alert level settings.
“You can tell straight away,” says Karl Quin of usually bustling Mill Lane. “People aren’t going to get caught with their pants down this time.” And how was it, knowing the virus was back? “It’s like being whacked in the face.”
Our road lay ahead, to the North, on State Highway 10. We were north of Taipa when Mike said: “We need to stop and have a talk. My symptoms are getting worse.”
We stopped and he rattled off a few: Sore throat; sinus pressure, feeling feverish.
And that was it. The Road Ahead stopped right there, in a roadside gravel pit a day short of our objective. The best health advice is to stay home if you’re ill, so that’s where we went.
After the Covid-19 test, I waited while Mike’s was done. In the asphalt carpark at the Turner Centre, a weed had grown through the hard-packed surface. I thought of the virus, and how life will struggle to find a way.
The end had arrived, and with it a realisation. For almost three weeks, we travelled the country and spoke to people about life in our pandemic world.
We talked to people on high, and down low, and we would talk of big things. We spoke of government policy, the fate of nations and the borders between those nations. We talked of the virus and where it came from, what it did, the toll it claimed.
We rarely spoke of the small things. It was rare we discussed washing of hands, wearing a mask, getting a Covid-19 test if you have cold-like symptoms, keeping a distance from others, not touching face or nose, staying home from work if you’re sick.
It is important to focus on the big things. It is critical we each, individually, take responsibility to focus on the small.
Our Covid-19 test results came after four days. They were negative.
