MAORI PARTY BOYCOTTS IN-PERSON PARLIAMENT
The Maori Party will not attend in- person sessions of Parliament under Covid-19 lockdown, saying National and ACT are endangering people by rejecting a virtual option.
Maori Party co-leader Debbie Ngarewa-Packer said she and fellow co-leader Rawiri Waititi would not be attending in- person Parliament.
The Green Party has also said it would only attend when Wellington is in level 3 - not today, when it is at level 4.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern asked the Speaker to suspend sitting of the House last week, but opted not to this week.
The Speaker and Labour pushed a "virtual Parliament" option that would have allowed MPs to participate by video-link, but National and ACT have rejected this, saying Parliament needed to be in-person to work.
While Labour could technically force a virtual Parliament or suspend sittings for another week unilaterally, decisions about the House are usually handled on a bipartisan basis.
National's Shadow Leader of the House Michael Woodhouse said democracy was "tactile" and he could not see why Ardern could hold 1pm media conferences but not appear in Parliament.
Ngarewa-Packer said National and ACT's response reeked of "white privilege".
"We will not allow National or ACT to dictate what oranga [welfare] looks like for us and so we will not be travelling to Wellington in level 4 conditions this week," she said. "We believe it is our role as leaders to . . . proceed with caution in order to protect our whakapapa.
"National and ACT are putting us all at risk. There is no reason why we cannot conduct parliamentary business via Zoom."
Waititi said he was concerned Labour was allowing in-person Parliament to go ahead.
"It is a reckless move by National and ACT to intentionally disregard expert advice, for the sake of egos and politicking."
All MPs in the House will be socially distanced and will need to wear a mask when not speaking.
Labour is only sending ministers already present in Wellington into the House.
National is sending five MPs into Wellington from around the country, but only one - leader Judith Collins - from Auckland.
ACT's David Seymour has been living in Wellington during the level 4 lockdown and will be the only MP attending from his party.
