$40M DISPUTE FUND IN PLACE OF RENT RELIEF
Justice Minister Andrew Little has announced a $40 million fund to assist businesses and landlords with the cost of tenancy disputes as a result of hardship suffered during the Covid-19 lockdown.
Many commercial tenants are facing financial hardship after losing several weeks of trading during the Covid-19 lockdown.
Some tenants have contracts that provide for a rent reduction in the event of an emergency, but many have been caught out.
Little had initially hoped to pass a temporary amendment to the Property Law Act that would have inserted a clause in commercial leases to require landlords to provide a "fair reduction in rent" when a business had suffered revenue loss because of Covid-19.
NZ First had agreed to that bill in Cabinet. The party had also agreed to setting up a $40m fund to help subsidise the cost of arbitration and mediation.
Green Party small-business spokeswoman Chloe Swarbrick described the issue as a David and Goliath battle between tenants and landlords. She said political parties had shown where their loyalties lay.
But before the bill got to Parliament, NZ First pulled its support, meaning it would not pass without National Party votes. Being unable to pass legislation, Little has reannounced the $40m fund to subsidise the cost of arbitration.
"It is critical that businesses who have not reached an agreement be assisted to find a solution that will help New Zealand recover from the economic impacts of Covid-19," Little said.
"This funding will ensure that tenants and landlords, even if financially constrained, will be able to access dispute resolution services."
But the fund may have limited effect. Businesses that don't have a clause in their rental agreements providing for a mediation or arbitration process won't be able to take their landlord to arbitration unless their landlord agrees to it - an unlikely scenario.
Little said he was "disappointed" NZ First had walked away from the deal.
"I have reached agreement with them at least twice across the table. They've walked back on that agreement and on that decision."
NZ First fired back at Little, calling the decision to proceed with the fund "Muldoonesque".
An NZ First spokesperson said the "so-called problem" of commercial leases "remains unstated, unquantified and not understood".
"Commercial lawyers have told us the moneyed party will merely see arbitration as a weigh station to litigation."
Swarbrick said it was "gutting" that the legislative solution didn't get across the line.
"It's a sad indictment on the way some commercial landlords have chosen to operate that the Government is now having to provide a fighting fund for small owner-operators to just survive - let alone get fair treatment - in the face of a global pandemic."
