LOCKDOWN COULD MEAN END OF SOME CLUBS
New Zealand golf clubs could face closure because of destroyed greens, with greenkeepers barred from working in the lockdown.
The Covid-19 pandemic and start of the four-week lockdown is causing angst in the golf community, with greenkeepers unable to care for greens - which require close attention.
New Zealand Golf (NZG), with the support of Sport New Zealand, has applied to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) for exemption, but is awaiting its response.
As of yesterday, the Covid-19 website's list of additional services stated: "Turf maintenance is not considered an essential service and should not be undertaken at this time."
NZG has asked for essential and critical maintenance to be carried out in a solo manner by an individual, who either lives on course or outside the golf facility.
If greenkeepers can't work on greens for at least the next month, there are fears fungal disease could wreak havoc, causing significant financial damage or destroying the course.
When the lockdown is eventually lifted, some courses will be unable to open.
Clubs will also battle to return courses to their previous standard. Many smaller clubs do not have the manpower, resources, or financial means to repatriate the course, and would likely have to shut down.
"Our greens are our babies and if we stay away from those for too long there will be repercussions down the other end with job losses and probably club closures," New Zealand Golf Course Superintendents Association president Steve Hodson said.
"If you're not spraying for disease, you could come back and your greens are gone altogether."
New Zealand has 390 golf clubs, about 106,000 registered club members, and 115,000 registered casual players.
With greenkeepers not allowed near the greens, courses would get moisture only from water sprinklers on timers and any rain.
Greens are mowed at a 3mm height and need to be trimmed five times per week, though they could get by with every third or fourth day in the lockdown.
"Grass keeps growing and that's the biggest thing. The grass doesn't know there's Covid-19 around, it just keeps going," Hodson said.
NZG chief executive Dean Murphy stressed it would only be essential maintenance work, carried out by an individual. This would prevent courses from being unusable or needing major repairs in the future.
