Mum distraught teen leaving bubble
A distraught mother believes the co-parenting guidelines from the Principal Family Court judge, Jacquelyn Moran, during the Covid-19 lockdown are vague and should be considered case by case.
The mother who cannot be identified for legal reasons is worried about her daughter’s living arrangements with her father who lives in the same city.
“The judge said parents need to put their differences aside and put the interests of the children first. But when you are dealing with someone you can’t communicate with who is narcissistic and controlling and has a different lifestyle to ours there is no coming to an agreement,” she said.
Last year the man who has permanent name suppression was caught with illegal drugs and a military-style, semi-automatic rifle with a 30-round magazine at his home. He was discharged without conviction because his lawyer argued the drugs helped him with chronic pain after an accident.
Before the lockdown, the mother claimed her daughter “reluctantly” visited her father but at least she was still going to school and had a friend to play with nearby.
But now with the country in lockdown, the mother is worried her daughter will be more “isolated and anxious” than ever.
“She is always in tears on the way to his house. Her dad doesn’t do active parenting like baking, crafts or exercises as I do at home. I worry about her mental wellbeing at the best of times, but now I am even more so.”
The woman’s greatest fear is she may not see her daughter for a while if she gets sick or if her father gets sick.
“He has been a chronic marijuana smoker and he coughs frequently without covering his mouth. Although the gun he used to have under his bed has gone, my daughter tells me he smokes ‘weird-smelling stuff’ which are not normal cigarettes,” she said.
She said the two households are completely different in “cleanliness and practices”. The woman and her teenager have been vigilant about washing their hands and keeping to themselves. But she is concerned her daughter will get depressed and bored with only a mobile phone to rely on for contact.
“My daughter is at the age where she wants to lie in bed all day. I have to say to her ‘Come on, let’s go for a walk’. When the alerts came on to our phones saying don’t leave the house, don’t drive unless you have to, stay in your bubble we were already in a bubble that was established. Now she is being sent to another one.”
Last week the Family Court issued guidelines for children from families who have shared care arrangements — the overriding consideration was for parents to make decisions in the best interests of their children.
Generally, children in the same communities can continue to go between their homes, unless the child is unwell, or someone in either home is unwell.
The woman has prepared her daughter with face masks, hand sanitiser, and online activities.
