TAMAKIS LINKED TO WITNESS
Destiny Church leaders Brian and Hannah Tamaki left Auckland on the eve of the February Covid-19 lockdown after a witness in a high-profile sexual assault case said he would "take their car" if they refused, the witness says.
Jevan Goulter, an immunity witness in the sexual assault case of a prominent businessman, lost his interim name suppression in the High Court yesterday.
Goulter worked as the media contact for the Coalition Party, launched by the Destiny Church leaders ahead of the 2000 general election, and said the Tamakis were "really good friends" of his.
Goulter told Stuff the lockdown was called in the middle of his time on the witness stand in the five-week case. Hannah Tamaki had attended court to support him throughout his testimony.
He said no-one told him before the case he wouldn't be "allowed to talk to anyone" until his testimony was finished. When the lockdown was announced on February 27 he was facing a week alone without contact with anyone, he said.
"I was thinking, seven days not being allowed to go anywhere. I said, 'get me out of here or I'm taking the car'.
"That's when they packed up [and left]. It's because of me."
Goulter said Brian and Hannah Tamaki refused to tell anyone the real reason for their leaving Auckland hours before lockdown.
The Tamakis left Auckland on February 27, the same night Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern called the lockdown to start at 6am the next day. They told a church service in Rotorua on the Sunday they had left to escape the lockdown.
Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said at the time their actions were "completely irresponsible".
A Destiny Church spokesperson declined to comment when contacted by Stuff.
Through a lawyer, Goulter cut a deal with the Crown in February 2018 to give testimony about his part in perverting the course of justice in the businessman's case.
He told the court he had accepted $56,000 from the businessman, and had flown to Australia's Gold Coast to meet a man who had accused the rich-lister of sexual assault.
The trip became known in the case as "the Gold Coast plot". Goulter, entertainer Mika X, formerly known as Mika Haka, and Goulter's friend Alison Edmonds hired a three-bedroom rooftop suite at the Palazzo Versace hotel and lured the complainant to meet them.
Goulter offered him a work contract supplied by Mika X in return for returning to Auckland and withdrawing his police complaint against the businessman. The plot fell through when the complainant refused and returned to his home.
X, Goulter and Edmonds all had their name suppression lapse at Haka's sentencing hearing yesterday. Mika X was sentenced to 11 months' home detention on two charges of dissuading a witness.
The businessman, who has name suppression, was convicted in the High Court at Auckland on March 23 after a five-week trial. He sexually assaulted three men, and tried to bribe one to drop his police case, the jury found.
