POLICE SPECIAL POWERS: WHAT THEY CAN AND CANNOT DO
Police officers are being told they must suspect someone has coronavirus to enforce the lockdown.
A police guidelines document, seen by Stuff lists scenarios police have no power to do - such as pulling over cars or entering properties to check lockdown compliance - unless they believe a person there may have Covid-19.
The document, titled Operational Policing Guidelines - Alert Level 4, scenarios for the Frontline, was issued to staff on March 28 by Police National Headquarters. Police Commissioner Mike Bush has since come under fire for not making the guidelines public.
The guidelines appear to contradict Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's comment on Sunday that "the police have all the resources they need to enforce the lockdown, including the power to arrest and detain people, if need be."
While police have been doing spot checks on people in mandatory isolation, such as returning travellers, as well as checkpoints, the guidelines suggest those powers do not extend to those who are well and unlikely to have the virus.
Of the three people police arrested for "persistent" lockdown breaches, two were detained before being released without charge, and the other was held to face pre-existing charges.
National Party leader Simon Bridges said he would support expanding police powers - even if it took a law change to do so.
What the police guidelines say
The document starts by telling officers there is no curfew in place, and people are still allowed to move around as long it does not have the potential to further spread the virus.
It notes there is no power to stop vehicles to check the occupants are complying with the Covid-19 health notice.
Police are reminded that at all times they need to apply "common sense" and understand the intent of what they are asking people to do.
Police are given four steps: engage, educate, encourage, and enforcement such as warnings or arrests, with the latter only to happen if "absolutely necessary".
The document includes a summary of the health act and civil defence emergency management act powers for responding to Covid-19.
Isolation was not part of the Medical Officer of Health's (MOOH) notice, with the Government relying on voluntary compliance to stop cars, enter properties or give directions.
If a serious incident arose involving failure to isolate, officers were advised to call the National Command and Coordination Centre, who would then contact the MOOH for a notice.
However, police do have the power to enter a property under the Civil Defence Emergency Act to enter a home if they believe someone with Covid-19 is not isolating.
Police also have the power to direct someone to go with them to a medical facility if they deem they may have Covid-19. The document gave staff a list of scenarios to help.
Teen party scenario
In this scenario, police are called to a teenage party in a suburban house, with no parents home. This is not covered by the health notice as it is at a private address.
The occupier says they are a group of friends who - bar one - live together and are having a low-key gathering and hurting no-one.
To exclude the friend, "you would need to determine whether you believe that this situation is one where there is a substantial public health risk (for example if someone was displaying symptoms or was known to have Covid-19, or had recently returned from overseas)".
Jogger scenario
In this scenario, police encounter a person or group who drove to go for a run, cycle or surf. "There is no enforcement power available as long as they are maintaining physical distancing from each other," the document says. "People engaging in a leisure or fitness activity within a reasonable distance of their home whilst maintaining appropriate physical distancing is reasonable in the circumstances."
Couple in a car scenario
Police pull over a couple in a car who do not live together. The driver says they were food shopping and he will drop his girlfriend off on his way home. Neither show coronavirus symptoms. All police can do is speak to them about keeping themselves safe because there is "no significant public risk".
