MOUNTAIN BIKES FROM MOLEHILLS
New Zealanders like to think of themselves as free- spirited, fun-loving and independent, but there is a strong strain in the national psyche that responds to orders and likes telling on others. During the Covid-19 lockdown, the national snitch is finally getting free rein.
Dobbing in others is important when life and death are at stake. How many viewers will have watched the footage of a mass gathering at a Queenstown backpackers hostel where social distancing rules seemed to be flouted, and wanted the offenders locked up or even deported?
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern seemed to have young rule-breakers in mind when she warned this week that New Zealand's 20-29-year-olds need to take the lockdown as seriously as everyone else.
Having unleashed a "rant", as she called it, it was almost inevitable the Government's strong line on rule-breakers would come back to haunt it. As if by some law of political karma, this happened only a day later, when it was reported that even Health Minister David Clark was setting a bad example.
It was not exactly the perfect crime. If Clark was hoping to go undercover when he drove to a mountain bike track in his hometown of Dunedin, he would not have used a van with his face and branding on the side. An anonymous member of the public took a photo of the parked vehicle and sent it to Stuff, which reported Clark had driven 2.3 kilometres from his home to go for a bike ride, in the middle of a pandemic lockdown when all but essential and local travel is restricted.
Clark confirmed he went for a bike ride between Thursday afternoon video calls. One or two pundits even thought he should resign for the alleged offence, as the bike ride illustrated one of the worst political sins, hypocrisy. "If there isn't some kind of severe response, every person who thinks the quarantine is an unjustified overreaction is going to be emboldened," is how one of the more thoughtful centre-right commentators put it.
"Huge hypocrisy from the minister of health of all people," said another. He should be sacked to show the importance of the lockdown, added a third.
Obviously, much of this is mischief-making and it's unlikely even the commentators entirely believe the sin was worth the coverage. A call for a resignation is almost a Pavlovian response in some quarters. It might also show that in the absence of real political scandal, with Government and Opposition working constructively, Clark's bike ride filled a void.
No-one could really believe a Government minister should not be allowed an exercise break during the day. Clark duly apologised and Ardern made it clear he will follow the official guidance from now on.
Apart from alleged hypocrisy, the argument from critics is that Clark may endanger others if he has an accident and needs assistance. Again, much of this seems petty and contrived.
There is much more substance to the criticism that with New Zealand facing its greatest health crisis in a century, the Government's minister of health should have been in Wellington and making himself available to the media alongside Ardern and Finance Minister Grant Robertson.
While there is a logic behind limiting the number of messengers, and putting the best communicators and most senior ministers in front of the public, his absence from the capital during the crisis seems unusual.
