CHAMBER CHIEF URGES PRIORITY FOR CITY WORKS
Government plans to launch into shovel- ready projects following the coronavirus lockdown should be a shot in the arm for Wellington's stalled infrastructure, the Chamber of Commerce says.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said the Government would release a list of infrastructure projects to begin as soon as possible after the lockdown, in an effort to help the economy bounce back from the disruption.
Only essential services are operating around New Zealand.
Wellington Chamber of Commerce chief executive John Milford said the $6.4 billion Let's Get Wellington Moving transport programme and fixing the city's struggling wastewater system should be at the top of the Government's to-do list when the infrastructure drive starts.
"Wellington has been crying out for transport infrastructure investment for the past decade," Milford said. "What better time than now for the Government to finally put forward investment into the capital city?"
Milford has called for the proposed extra Mt Victoria tunnel and mass public- transit system between the railway station and airport to be given priority on the Government's list. He also wants the $1b Petone-to-Grenada highway, which will not be considered for funding until 2028, to be included as well.
"Wellington City has some of the oldest water pipes in the country, a Civic Square which is now derelict, vulnerable buildings, and transport corridors that are gridlocked. It is becoming clearer by the day that Wellington City Council does not have the financial capacity to make such significant investments."
The $700 million tunnel project is scheduled to get under way within the next decade, while the mass transit system, expected to cost up to $2.2b, is scheduled to be open after 2029. No funding has been set aside for either project.
"While the rest of the country has benefited from the Provincial Growth Fund, the Wellington region has been excluded [from funding]," Milford said. "And while Auckland and Canterbury have both had significant investment, Wellington's gone without."
Milford also said the funding split for the transport programme was no longer practical, with local councils expected to pay 40 per cent.
Wellington City Council is considering a rates freeze for many commercial and residential properties for the 2020-21 financial year, as well as a range of other fee rebates which would leave the council in a $70m financial hole.
A recent survey by the chamber found Wellington businesses considered an extra Mt Victoria tunnel, mass transit system, and improved wastewater system the most important projects for the region.
Transport Minister Phil Twyford said the Government was looking at transport projects across the country that could help create jobs as soon as construction resumed. "That's why we've set up the Infrastructure Industry Group to work with the regions and identify shovel-ready projects that will soften the blow from the Covid-19 pandemic."
