LET'S RAISE A TOAST TO TECHNOLOGY
At 10pm, 22 hours into Covid-19 lockdown, I walk into my teen daughter's room, wondering what the noise is. She's staring at her device, giggling. There, on the phone in her hand, are about eight faces - her friends all occupy a tiny square on her screen, all videoing in from their homes around Wellington.
Their grins are wide, and they're chatting.
"All OK?" I ask my 14-year-old, as she ignores me, laughing again. She is on the latest virtual chat app, Houseparty, which is replicating the social life for millions around the globe. Last week, the San Francisco-based app raked in 2 million downloads worldwide, compared with around 130,000 per week a month ago. At the time this went to press it was the top Apple app in 17 countries, all hit by Covid-19.
Both my teens spend their evenings now going to "parties", spontaneously joining their friends to hang out. As I close her door and ask her to quieten down just a bit, I silently thank Steve Jobs. Imagine coping with Covid-19 with nobody but our households for company in isolation, if we couldn't jump online to connect with the world?
When the Government announced this four- week lockdown, I was particularly worried about my daughters, and how cut off they would feel from their friends. True, it is early days for all of us, but I underestimated how a huge part of their socialising is already done via their devices. Or at least, I didn't appreciate it.
Like many parents, I've spent a lot of time telling my kids to get off their phones, worried they're turning into digital zombies. I've also spent a lot of time raving to my teens about the analogue world I grew up in, a time I illuminated as though it was the golden age.
"We went and met our friends and played outside into the night," I would say.
"We picked up the phone and talked to our friends. I used a pen and wrote letters to my friends and family."
I used to worry that digital communication was threatening our human relationships, but I now think it could save them, along with our sanity.
Imagine being cut off in our homes, with just our partners and kids, or possibly on our own, if we couldn't video call our parents, friends, lovers and workmates? Imagine trying to keep workplaces and schools going?
Yes, when everyone is hooking into the wi-fi in one house, technology can disappoint. But technology makes the lockdown rules easier to bear, and increases the chances that people obey them.
The night after telling my daughter to quieten down at her "house party", I sign up for Houseparty too. I join a party with my friend back from overseas and in isolation. Her G&T clinks in a glass as I pour a wine. We chat over drinks via our phones, and it's almost as good as the real thing.
Later, I FaceTime my father, who I won't see for the next month as he lives in Napier and is over 70. I do the same with my sister in Christchurch, who was supposed to visit Wellington for the now-cancelled CubaDupa.
I'm a highly social person. I've always preferred meeting friends in the flesh and giving them a hug. It's taking me time to adapt to virtual meet-ups, but I think it's actually going to be OK.
I did find the stage 2, in-between world before lockdown strange anyway: meeting friends standing two metres apart, paranoid someone might touch someone else, and greeting each other stiffly, via the touch of an elbow.
During the lockdown, I will attend all my university workshops via Zoom. I miss the campus, but our first streamed class went surprisingly well, and it was a relief to see everyone's smiling faces and connect over our writing progress.
This week, the kids dialled in for online classes, and they reflected on the perks of going to a virtual school - they don't have to be up for the 7.20am bus, and they don't have to wear their uniforms.
Until the world returns to normal, they're also relieved I won't be calling out: "Get off your phones."
