Lockdown harms revealed
Adelayed cancer diagnosis and vision loss are among patient harm linked to Covid-19 restrictions, and a newborn needed surgery after lockdown led to a lack of donor breast milk.
The country’s 20 DHBs have begun publishing details of “serious adverse events”, generally defined as having resulted in serious harm or death.
A handful of the summaries, covering from July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020, provide enough detail to determine whether Covid-related measures or disruptions were a factor.
At Counties Manukau, a delay in eye treatment for a high priority patient with vision in only one eye suffered a “poor outcome” amid “variation across Auckland DHBs with Covid-19 pandemic planning”.
“It is unknown how many other patients have been compromised,” the report states.
Southern DHB, which covers Dunedin, recorded a number of patient falls, including one resulting in a wrist fracture during lockdown.
Staff had been sent to the emergency department, leaving only three to care for a ward of 28 patients: “Ward areas combined due to Covid-19 meant there was limited staff available. Duty manager aware and unable to assist.”
A cancer diagnosis was “deferred due to Covid-19” and a baby born in a rural birthing unit died after a delay in transfer to secondary care. There were “discrepancies between perceived information given by the lead maternity carer and the patient’s understanding”. Covid-19 pandemic and partner restrictions had a “significant impact” on the patient’s decision-making, the report said.
Wellington’s Capital & Coast DHB reported a delay in treatment for a stroke during lockdown and a premature baby in Wellington Hospital’s neonatal intensive care “received formula due to a lack of supply of donor breast milk during Covid-19 lockdown resulting in complications that required surgery”. A donor milk pasteurisation and storage facility has since been bought.
A total of 975 serious adverse events were reported to the Health Quality & Safety Commission for 2019/20, 627 reported by DHBs.
Auckland DHB, which has started investigations after four women died during or soon after pregnancy this year, has yet to release a report.
Three women died after level 3 restrictions began on March 23. One maternal death was recorded in the previous three years.
Auckland DHB says the causes don’t appear related, but it’s crucial to identify any systemic problems.
Although Covid-19 restrictions have been linked to serious harm, they stopped hospitals being overwhelmed by coronavirus cases, and avoided deaths from flu and reduced road crashes.
However, backlogs and pressure on some services remain an issue, despite Budget 2020 providing a one-off boost of $283 million over three years to clear backlogs.
An Auckland child didn’t get free dental treatment for more than seven years, and needed extensive work when they were finally treated.
The case has been listed in a report by Waitematā DHB, which runs the Auckland Regional Dental Service, providing free dental care to children and teenagers across greater Auckland.
An investigation found there was no proper engagement with the family to ensure the child received timely appointments.
Before 2018, if a child didn’t attend two appointments, the service sent a “final letter” advising no further appointments would be made.
Recommendations included stopping the practice of issuing “final letters”, and to use better systems to monitor children.
