IN BRIEF
Gang pad arrestsPatched Mongrel Mob gang members have been arrested after police dropped by a Hamilton gang pad over suspected coronavirus lockdown breaches. Waikato police officers visited a Mongrel Mob house on Friday night and gave a formal warning to a gang member from Napier who should not have been there. The police returned on Saturday for a follow-up visit and arrested two patched Mob members — a 35-year-old Aucklander who was charged with unlawful possession of a pistol, and a 32-year-old Hamilton man who had a warrant to arrest for failing to appear in court in March. Both men are due to appear at Hamilton District Court today. Detective Sergeant Andrew Saunders said a 28-year-old patched Mongrel Mob member from Tokoroa ignored alert level 3 restrictions.
Fast-track consentsA new fast-track consenting process will approve “shovel-ready” infrastructure projects in as few as 25 days, the Government says. Cabinet approved changes to the Resource Management Act last week and legislation is expected to be passed in June. The changes will allow Environment Minister David Parker to determine which projects can be fast-tracked, overseen by a panel chaired by a current or retired Environmental Court judge or senior lawyer and including relevant local councils and iwi representatives. Once a project is referred to the panel, “there is a high level of certainty the resource consent will be granted”, the Government said. The panel will be able to greenlight a project within 25 days or up to 50 days for large-scale infrastructure. Parker said projects that would benefit included roading, walking and cycling, rail, housing, sediment removal from silted rivers and estuaries, new wetland construction, flood management works, and projects to prevent landfill erosion. Parker said environmental safeguards would remain.
Racism fears The Human Rights Commission says racism has risen sharply in the coronavirus pandemic. Since the end of March, it had received more than 250 complaints relating to Covid-19 and 82 were race-related. Race Relations Commissioner Meng Foon said there was a particular rise in bullying and harassment of people of Chinese and Asian descent. According to the commission, Chinese/Asians do not normally report complaints because of cultural barriers, which was highlighted as particularly concerning.
