HOMELESS HUB FEELS LIKE HOME
Ahub for Whanganui's homeless is feeling like a more permanent feature in the city, inspiring others to help vulnerable residents.
The Anzac Parade freedom camping site became the Whanganui Homeless Hub in August in response to the coronavirus lockdown.
A volunteer-run solution backed by donations, the hub gave homeless people a safe space to have a bubble when the Whanganui District Council closed public toilets at the start of lockdown.
While Whanganui mayor Hamish McDouall previously told Stuff residents at the hub would have to move once the city went to alert level 2, the hub is still running.
Hub co-ordinator Sonny Barlow told Stuff, who visited the site on Saturday, 70 people had used the site since it opened, but there was a core group who stayed the whole time.
Recent additions included a new truck trailer transformed into a kitchen and communal area, a shower and washing block, a television and internet modem.
The council had offered other sites for the hub to move to, but the residents knew those areas were not safe, Barlow said.
"People don't want to leave unless they're going to be safe."
Hub resident Kahurangi Edwards said he had been on the streets for about nine years after being blacklisted from many housing providers.
He had a history of mental illness, spending time in multiple psychiatric wards including the infamous Lake Alice psychiatric hospital. He later became addicted to methamphetamine to cope with past trauma.
Hub volunteers picked him up while he was sleeping behind a petrol station, giving him a caravan to sleep in.
"I can't remember when I last had my own space. So, so, so long ago."
Volunteers helped him with shopping, while little things, like being brought a fresh coffee in the morning, made the hub a great place to stay. "I feel warm because I'm around good people here. I feel at home here."
He gave up meth after moving to the hub, with Saturday his sixth day clean. Not blowing all his money on meth meant he was able to buy new clothing.
"The white [meth] keeps you up 24/7, but now I sleep and am happier."
Tiffany-Kimmi Haddon, who lives at the hub with her dog Moi, said she was homeless for years.
Family in the city did not offer support, so she bounced between various locations.
She was living in a caravan with a broken wheel in the Splash Centre carpark when both police and hub volunteers showed up at the start of lockdown. She believed she would not have survived lockdown because of multiple health issues if she had not gone to the hub.
"It's awesome and peaceful here. We support each other because we all know each other."
Being able to keep Moi had been key for her wellbeing, but finding a rental allowing a dog was almost impossible, Haddon said.
Liz Neill, Kiri Mckee and Azian Zulkifli were also at the hub on Saturday, but as part of their work to try to solve food poverty in the city.
They had partnered with the hub to create a "social supermarket", where people could go once a week to get food for free.
Mckee said the hub and associated groups such as the Koha Shed and Palmerston North's Just Zilch had been an inspiration.
