GOVERNMENT WAS SLOW TO ACT ON MASKS
In April, a month after New Zealand went into alert level 4 lockdown, some of the country's leading public health experts said it was time for Kiwis to start wearing face masks to speed up Covid-19 elimination.
But the Ministry of Health did not recommend mask use in the community, saying there was not enough evidence they were effective outside clinical settings.
It wasn't until August, four months later, that health officials started to encourage Kiwis to add masks to their emergency household kits. It's now generally accepted that masks or face coverings can help stop infectious droplets spreading when people speak, laugh, cough or sneeze.
Why did it take New Zealand - a country praised the world over for its successful coronavirus elimination - so long to adopt this low- cost, effective tool that was already being widely used elsewhere?
University of Otago public health expert Associate Professor Nick Wilson says the ministry's guidance on masks was the country's biggest single failure of the Covid-19 response.
He thinks it reflected stubbornness and an inability to learn from those who had been down the pandemic path before.
Taiwan and South Korea responded to the Covid-19 pandemic effectively by drawing on lessons learnt from the Sars and Mers outbreaks - including widespread use of masks from the start.
However, the ministry initially modelled its advice on that of the World Health Organisation (WHO), which said early on that use of masks in the wider community wasn't necessary, though it did recommend them for health workers.
Initially, the focus in New Zealand was on the availability and distribution of masks and other protective gear for health workers. But officials said decisions about wider community use were based on evidence, rather than any lack of supply.
The WHO shifted its stance to support mask use in the community on June 6, but the ministry still did not.
By the end of July, New Zealand was one of only 26 countries worldwide to have no mask requirements. The majority of OECD countries had adopted some form of mask requirements by then, and a number of states in the US also mandated use.
Mask use was strongly recommended from early August. Health Minister Chris Hipkins acknowledged the change in WHO advice, and the ever-evolving body of evidence around Covid-19.
From midnight on Sunday, August 30, masks finally became mandatory on public transport while the country is at alert level 2 and above. Several people were infected by sharing an Auckland bus with someone who had Covid- 19 before the rules changed.
Wilson says there should now be widespread mask use within high schools and aged residential care facilities as well.
