Cautious hope as cases slow
NZ about to hit 1000 cases but most people are following lockdown rules
Health officials are today expected to announce that New Zealand has surpassed 1000 confirmed and probable cases of Covid-19.
This comes 37 days after Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern confirmed New Zealand’s first case of the virus, which has now infected more than 1 million people around the world.
But there are encouraging signs for New Zealand, which has been under lockdown for now more than a week, with around three more to go.
“It may well be [Covid-19] is peaking now because we’re seeing it flattening off,” director-general of health Ashley Bloomfield said yesterday.
This is positive news, as one of the prerequisites for coming out of the level 4 lockdown is fewer new confirmed cases across the country.
“We’re increasingly confident these lockdown measures are working,” Bloomfield said.
There is now no doubt that many outdoor activities are banned. Kiwis had previously been advised not to go swimming, surfing, boating or hunting during the lockdown but the ban was made official in fresh laws released on the Government’s Covid-19 website yesterday.
Overall, Bloomfield said there has been a “very, very high level” of public compliance when it comes to the lockdown measures although some people were still breaking the rules.
On Friday, he signed a new public health notice which makes it clear than under the level 4 lockdown, people are not allowed to do any water-based activities — such as swimming, surfing or boating — tramping or hunting.
Bloomfield is now scheduled to brief Cabinet sometime within the next week about what would be required to move the country, or at least some parts of it, out of level 4.
“What we have seen over the past four or five days is effectively a flattening off of the number of new cases, including over the past two or three days with that much higher level of testing,” he told media yesterday.
He confirmed the 82 new and probable Covid-19 cases were slightly up on Friday’s 71, but down on Thursday’s 89.
The total number of Covid-19 cases in New Zealand now stands at 950.
Although sounding optimistic, he was careful not to get ahead of himself.
“But I would want to see probably another two or three days before we would start to know if there has definitely [been a] flattening off.”
The drop in the number of new cases is particularly good news, given that officials have ramped up testing capacity.
More than 3600 tests were completed on Friday — taking the total number of tests completed so far to 33,116.
In other words, just under three in every 100 tests have come back positive.
Last week, Ardern said April 6 was the first day when there could be signs that the “chain of Covid-19 transmission” had been broken.
She said if the number of new cases starts to shrink from then, the lockdown could be eased.
But she warned if community transmission is continuing, or even becoming rampant, the lockdown will likely be extended.
Bloomfield yesterday said there are 10 significant Covid-19 clusters across the country, the biggest being around Auckland’s Marist school where there are 60 associated cases.
New Zealand’s death toll remains at one — but the number of deaths in the US has climbed to more than 7000.
In response to the continued spread in the US, the Centres for Disease Control recommended that all Americans wear face masks when they leave their home.
And that is advice New Zealand’s health officials may soon be recommending as well.
Director of Public Health Caroline McElnay told reporters yesterday that health officials were poised to receive advice from the World Health Organisation in the coming days as to whether all Kiwis should be wearing face masks in public at all times.
The rationale is to limit the spread of Covid-19 from those who have the virus but are not showing any symptoms.
According to Ministry of Health advice, people can have the disease but not be showing symptoms.
Any new face mask rules would be aimed at limiting the spread from those individuals.
But McElnay told reporters that everyone wearing face masks was “right at the very bottom of our strategies for containment of Covid-19”.
She said are other measures, such as proper hygiene, are more effective in limiting the viruses’ spread.
But Bloomfield was quick to point out that the US was in a “very different situation” from New Zealand.
“They have clearly widespread infections and widespread community transmission,” he said after McElnay’s comments on face masks.
“They have a much lower rate of testing and that’s partly why they have gone to advising the use of [masks].”
