VIRUS REAPPEARANCE 'ALMOST INEVITABLE'
A large Covid-19 outbreak would overwhelm contact tracing systems and force New Zealand into lockdown, warn experts.
Epidemiologist Sir David Skegg says it is "almost inevitable" Covid-19 will reappear in the community, and a failure to act quickly could see this country in the same situation as the Australian state of Victoria.
Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews declared a state of disaster on Sunday, imposing new lockdown measures and an overnight curfew for Melbourne after a surge in coronavirus infections and deaths.
It is a situation that could "easily be replicated here, if we are not able to act quickly enough to eliminate the infection", Skegg said.
"In New Zealand, we are enjoying a life of relative normality but it is vital that we don't become complacent."
His priorities for avoiding a Victoria- style outbreak included hand hygiene and physical distancing, better Covid-19 surveillance, targeted testing and sewage testing, more contact tracing, and preparation for mass masking.
"We need a greater sense of urgency in getting prepared, because so many countries that were enjoying success in controlling Covid-19 are now struggling with relapses. We should be using this lull in the battle to prepare for the next challenge," he added.
It has been 96 days since New Zealand has had community transmission, and cases would have to come from breaches in managed isolation.
A single or isolated cluster outbreak would result in the country moving to alert level 2, requiring physical distancing and a 100-person cap on events.
If the situation progressed to suspected community transmission, there could be a move to alert level 3 and a return to bubbles.
The most likely way the virus would infect Kiwis would be through a border control failure, said Dr Nick Wilson, a public health expert at the University of Otago.
A second wave would involve a sustained rise in infections. Any outbreak would be followed by contact tracing, isolation and quarantine.
"If things get out of control, like in Victoria, we will be in that lockdown situation again," he said.
One in four people with Covid-19 were not at home when door-knocked by the Australian Defence Force last week.
And professor of public health Michael Baker said complacency was "seeping" into life here, despite the ever- present threat of a large outbreak.
"The classic case is someone who has absconded from a facility, and gone to a big family event while infectious."
Other ways the virus could enter the community were from airport staff, ship crews, managed isolation staff, and other unexpected arrivals.
"We could be Victoria tomorrow, unless we have the contact tracing systems working very well.
"The success in New Zealand came from managing borders and eventually closing them to non-New Zealanders. After that, it was an intense lockdown that stopped it. We would be swamped if we had a large outbreak."
Baker has long been an advocate for mass masking, which he said should be included in the alert level system at level 2 and above.
International flights, airports, quarantine and isolation facilities, general practice waiting rooms, emergency departments of hospitals, and residential care homes were also places where the virus could spread.
