HUTT HOSPITAL C-SECTION RATE LABELLED CRISIS
Two in five babies at Hutt Hospital are born via caesarean section, one of the highest rates in the country, prompting a board member to say its maternity service is in a "crisis" while its chief executive says she too is concerned.
A new report presented to Capital & Coast and Hutt Valley district health boards found that caesarean rates dropped during Covid-19 lockdown levels 4 and 3, raising concerns that some were unnecessary, which can be linked to worse health outcomes for mothers and babies.
This is the latest concern for the hospital's long-beleaguered women's health services. In 2018, an external review found "a chronic workforce deficiency", high rates of babies admitted to the special care baby unit with neonatal brain asphysxia and a caesarean rate of 41 per cent. The report followed a number of complaints and the death of a baby in 2016.
"If it can happen during Covid that they have less intervention, why - now the crisis is over - why are those caesareans increasing immediately?" Hutt Valley District Health Board member Prue Lamason asked at a joint board meeting on Thursday.
"They dropped during Covid-19 because, presumably, the specialists didn't want to come in because it's dangerous, so the women didn't have that intervention," she said. "So, in my opinion, the intervention is often far too early.
"I keep being told something is happening about it but we, as a board, never seem to hear about it. I think it is a crisis in the Hutt maternity ward. This is an issue which has gone on and on and on, and I am thinking of the women and the babies' health."
Hutt Hospital figures for the year ending in August show 39.6 per cent of babies were born via caesarean - a 3 per cent rise on the previous year.
The latest Ministry of Health data shows 21 per cent of Hutt Hospital births were via emergency C-section - the highest in the country for 2018. For the same year, emergency as well as planned caesareans accounted for 33.5 per cent of births.
Auckland had the highest combined emergency and planned caesareans, accounting for 34 per cent of births. Seventeen per cent of those were emergency.
College of Midwives chief executive Alison Eddy said a prolonged labour was the main reason a caesarean section was performed, although staffing pressures also lead to the procedure.
Midwives did not decide on when caesareans were performed but those with higher health needs, particularly in lower socio-economic areas, would be more likely to need one.
There should be a "rational reason" but staffing pressures could play a "significant role".
"The most common reason is because the labour is prolonged. Nobody is necessarily in danger. It is major abdominal surgery so it's not ideal for women if it's avoidable," Eddy said.
Hutt Valley District Health Board chief executive Fionnagh Dougan said the board would have an in-depth discussion on the issue at a later date.
"We are concerned by the Hutt, obviously," she told the meeting.
The DHB's chief medical officer, John Tait, said it was "a national problem and there are various ways it's being looked at".
