Quarantine hits family in pocket
Auckland’s Christine Wang, Wen Miao and kids in lockdown
Christine Wang is turning to the kindness of teachers to leave school books at the letterbox and online grocery shopping to help her family endure a self-imposed coronavirus lockdown.
Her family are among many recently returned from China being asked by health authorities to stay home for 14 days in case they contracted the virus without realising.
Wang flew home on January 31 after her family cut their China trip short once the first coronavirus cases appeared in the city of Nanjing, about 500km from Wuhan.
They’ve been unable to return to their West Auckland dairy and have to wait upstairs when the supermarket delivery arrives at their door. Thanks to friends dropping goodies at their gate and the primary school teacher leaving reading materials for their daughter, the family are passing the time well.
“We don’t really feel that awkward and stuck thanks to them,” Wang said.
For Wang, husband Wenham Miao and daughters Poppy, 5, and Lily, 3, the situation in China changed fast. They arrived in Nanjing to visit Miao’s parents on January 20 to find it bustling. Miao’s father was unaware of the virus outbreak. But then Wuhan went into lockdown on January 23, before the first three cases were reported in Nanjing on January 24.
Wang and her family shut themselves in their hotel room for the next week. Miao’s parents were desperate to see their grandkids but the couple told them not to because older people were more susceptible to the virus.
The streets below their hotel emptied and shops closed up.
“It is quite amazing to see things change all of a sudden like that,” Wang said.
Local television programming filled with news about the outbreak.
“It was pretty intense, the media over there, but not in a scary way — more in an educational way.”
It helped Wang explain to her eldest daughter why they were cooped up.
“You see those doctors what they are wearing, it’s different from the doctors you usually see, it’s because they are protecting themselves so they can protect the patients,” she told her daughter.
“And that’s what I’m still telling her ... we are staying at home because we need to protect the people in New Zealand until we make sure we are 100 per cent fine.”
It was also “really intense” in the airport in China. The family had their temperatures checked and were asked if they had been to Wuhan.
By contrast, arriving back in New Zealand “was pretty mild”. The family were given a leaflet asking them to self-isolate. Their daughter’s school had earlier emailed about what they should do.
It meant taking a financial hit during the busy summer season because the family couldn’t return to the Oratia Superette on West Coast Rd. Instead, the shop is running on shortened hours thanks to a friend working in their place.
The couple have been flooded with support on the dairy’s Facebook page after keeping customers updated.
Luckily, they also have a rural property with a big backyard so the kids can run around and see a silver lining in that they now have some spare time.
“I’m going to sort out my garage because it’s just full of boxes and I don’t know what’s inside them,” Wang joked.
