‘Reasonable chance’ lockdown has worked
No new cases augurs well that the spread has been contained, say virus modellers
No further cluster cases today could suggest a “reasonable chance” that Auckland’s lockdown snuffed out any virus still in the community, a Covid-19 modeller says.
Cabinet ministers today face a “complex” decision over Auckland’s alert level settings — and will be wary of another yo-yo into lockdown if the Valentine’s Day cluster isn’t properly stamped out.
Associate Health Minister Peeni Henare said yesterday that the country would have to stay at least two more days in current alert levels, despite no new community cases being recorded yesterday.
Kiwis will have to wait until after today’s Cabinet meeting before finding out if Auckland will drop out of level 3 and the rest of New Zealand out of level 2 from 6am on Sunday.
No new fresh cases in the cluster have been recorded since “Case O” — a household contact of four other cases, who has been in quarantine since February 23 — was reported on Sunday.
“That’s definitely a promising sign,” Te Punaha Matatini modeller Professor Michael Plank said.
“And the longer we go with no case, the better it looks. If we get no new cases coming up today ... there’s a reasonable chance that, if there were any other cases, Auckland will have been in level 3 by the time they became infectious.”
The incubation period of the Sars-CoV-2 virus — that’s the time between exposure to the virus and symptom onset — could sometimes be as long as 14 days, but it typically averaged five to six days.
“So hopefully, that will reduce the chance that they would have passed it on.”
More than 16,000 tests were processed on Tuesday, as Auckland opened 11 new testing community centres to meet a surge in demand. More than 14,000 tests were processed yesterday, 7853 of them in Auckland.
“If we are testing the right people — and they continue to come back negative — then that’s a pretty good sign that this particular cluster hasn’t spread further,” Plank said. “But it’s especially important that we test those close and casual contacts that the ministry has identified.”
More than 98 per cent of casual plus contacts of “Case A” at Papatoetoe High School have tested negative, after being retested. As of yesterday, 11 of these students had yet to have a second Covid test and eight were visited by health officials on Tuesday. Two students had refused a test and were being isolated.
A further 33 “close plus” contacts at Kmart Botany, where another of the cluster cases worked, had also returned negative tests as of Tuesday, as had nearly all of the people who reported being in the store at times of interest.
But Plank said there was still a risk to consider.
“I think the thing that will make [Cabinet ministers] cautious is that we really want to avoid a yo-yo back up the alert level — so they may conclude it’s worth staying the course for those extra few days,” he said.
“It’s a complex decision, because there are now also questions over whether people are following the rules, or staying home when they should be. That would probably be weighing into the decision as well.”
Te Punaha Matatini modelling expert Professor Shaun Hendy said he believed if there were no new community cases today the Government would likely reduce alert levels.
There was a sting in the tail of the initial outbreak with a three-day lockdown not sufficient to close it out.
The latest seven-day lockdown was the Government making absolutely sure to shut it down with confidence.
“The one thing we know with this B.1.1.7 variant, you really don’t want to let it get out of control,” Hendy said.
“It spreads more rapidly and does take a lot of work to control it so my calculus is these shorter, sharper lockdowns to bring these new variants under control is probably worth it in the long run.”
He said it was a super-spreading virus so while four out of five people who get infected would only impact household or very close contacts, the fifth person would spread it widely.
