Judge rules son can visit his dying dad
Court challenge overturns officials’ repeated refusals to allow breaking of quarantine
AHigh Court judge has allowed a son to visit his dying father — over-ruling the Government’s Covid-19 lockdown orders.
Oliver Christiansen’s dad repeatedly asked: “Where is my boy?”
But Christiansen couldn’t see him — he was subject to the Government’s mandatory 14-day isolation period after arriving in New Zealand on April 23 on a flight from Britain.
Christiansen spoke to the Herald yesterday about his “eight days of battling” before being able to spend about 36 hours with his father, Anthony Christiansen, who had brain cancer and died on Sunday.
When he left his family in London, Christiansen thought he had time to sit out the quarantine before spending his father’s last days with him.
“Things were still looking okay. We thought we had plenty of time to see out the 14 days,” he said.
But his father’s condition deteriorated rapidly. Doctors gave him only a few days to live and suddenly it was a race against the clock.
Christiansen, who had no symptoms of coronavirus, applied to the Ministry of Health to allow him to see his dying father on compassionate grounds. The ministry, after first mistaking what Christiansen was asking for, repeatedly refused.
An email reply to him read that “there is just nothing we can change at this time. 14 days isolation in managed facilities is a mandated requirement in force in New Zealand”.
Christiansen then directly emailed director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield and the Minister of Health, David Clark.
Bloomfield responded within 90 minutes saying he would refer the letter to the managed isolation team to “carefully consider the information”. But again he was denied.
Christiansen also asked for a Covid-19 test but was refused because he had no symptoms.
Yesterday, he said the unwillingness of authorities to test him for Covid-19 was extremely frustrating as it seemed a “logical step”.
So Christiansen went to court to challenge Bloomfield and the ministry’s refusal to allow him to cut short his quarantine period.
“It just seemed like continual automatic rejection ... the courts were a last avenue for a final roll of the dice.”
Meanwhile, his father’s health kept deteriorating rapidly. His family were “increasingly desperate” for him to get to farewell his father — and vice versa.
From his quarantine hotel, he could almost see his family’s Auckland home only 5km to 6km away.
The courts recognised how precious time was, he said, and pushed through his case.
At a hearing on Friday in the High Court at Auckland, Justice Tracey Walker said the ministry got it wrong.
She said it was “difficult to envisage more compassionate grounds than those presented here”.
Christiansen told the Herald he was able to spend just over a day with his father before he passed away.
When he finally got to see his father, it was an emotional time.
“It was a massive relief to be able to join the family in time.”
Justice Walker said in her ruling, released yesterday, there was “a very strong argument” to let Christiansen visit his father after it was “not considered on the correct legal grounds and did not take account of relevant mandatory considerations”.
“It had the hallmarks of automatic rejection based on circumscribed criteria rather than a proper exercise of discretion required by the Health Act (Managed Air Arrivals) Order.”
The judge said the ministry decisions to decline permission were, on their face, “legally flawed on more than [one] basis”.
The judge said that in her assessment, overall justice “demands an effective and swift response”.
“I have in mind here particularly the imminence of Mr Christiansen’s father’s passing and the very material factor that visitation is only at a private home and not in a public space.”
She ordered the ministry to permit Christiansen to leave managed isolation to visit his father.
But he could only do so if he travelled unaccompanied by car to his dad’s home and remained there until his father died.
Christiansen was also told to maintain physical separation from other family members at the home and to return on his own within 24 hours of his father’s death to the isolation facility for the rest of the 14 days.
Justice Walker further told him to ensure any necessary cleaning and/or quarantining of that private car was carried out, to wear personal protective equipment and to comply with any other reasonable conditions directed by the ministry.
The judge also considered the question of “the appropriate deference to the expertise of the decision makers in a time of unprecedented public crisis”.
“No matter how necessary or demonstrably justified the Covid-19 response, decisions must have a clear and certain basis,” she said. “They must be proportionate to the justified objective of protecting New Zealand bearing in mind the fundamental civil rights at issue — freedom of movement and of assembly in accordance with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990.”
There have been several questions raised about the legality of the Government’s strict lockdown orders.
Such concerns have included a Crown Law opinion warning the police they had little or no power to enforce the lockdown.
And last Friday, Court of Appeal president Justice Stephen Kos said challenges over the issue of whether the Government’s coronavirus decisions have been lawful should be tested in an expedited judicial review.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said yesterday it was important to make sure “we learn” from the rulings.
Christiansen, who is back in quarantine, said he has “full respect” for health authorities and what they are trying to achieve, and is sure “most of the time they are doing a fine job”.
“But something seemed terribly wrong with this process,” he said. “If it means that other people don’t have to go through the same thing, then it was worth it. And luckily, most importantly, we got to farewell him as a family.”
Ardern said 18 people who had recently returned to NZ had been allowed to visit ill family members.
But a later statement said she was given inaccurate information on the number of exemptions granted on compassionate grounds. The actual number was zero.
As of April 30, the number of requests from a returned traveller, or travellers, for an exemption to the conditions of their isolation totalled 283. The number granted was 18.
To the same date, the number of “compassionate” or similar requests for exemptions totalled 73, 24 of which were to visit a relative dying or close to dying. None was granted.
Ardern said she had now spoken to the Minister of Health and asked that each of these cases are reviewed in light of the court’s ruling.
The Ministry of Health has also “sincerely” apologised for “confusion” over compassionate exemptions.
