LUXURY ECO BRAND IS A PASSION AND A BUSINESS
Simone Johnson's Whangamata business selling luxury eco- friendly goods was just three months old when New Zealand went into coronavirus lockdown.
At first unsure if Yellow Bikini was going to survive, Johnson soon found there was still an appetite for artisan products that aimed for a small environmental impact.
"We were so new - we only launched in December, we didn't really know what was going to happen," Johnson said.
Yellow Bikini products, which include luxury coconut wax candles and soaps, were in just one store when Covid-19 hit, and Johnson was able to capitalise on the growing number of people turning to online shopping.
Her products now sell in nine outlets, mainly in the upper North Island, but also in one stockist in Christchurch.
Johnson worked in marketing for about nine years, until she turned a passion for nutrition into a business. She changed tack again in July last year to follow another passion, for environmentally friendly products.
Originally from Auckland, she holidayed at Whangamata during her childhood at her family bach, and she has returned to the Coromandel beach town.
"Growing up near the beach I really cared about the environment and the ocean, and I guess that's quite similar to a lot of New Zealanders," she said.
At this stage, she is where she wanted to be in terms of her business plan, but "it hasn't looked anything like I thought it would look like, obviously".
"I guess you kind of expect obstacles along the way, because of Covid we just had different obstacles than what was predicted."
Supply issues and delays hit the goods she was importing, and stock levels were down.
She imports the coconut bowls that hold the wax, while the coconut wax and fragrance are from New Zealand. "We did the best we could, and we explained to customers there was a bit of a delay sometimes. They were pretty understanding."
The candles are hand-poured at her Whangamata workshop, where Johnson works up to 12-hour days.
"Leading up to Christmas it's gone crazy, and this month we're looking at third-party logistics, so we won't be packaging any more. So we're no longer packaging and sending because my time is better utilised doing other stuff."
She has already reached her first goal, which was to go full- time into the business. She is focusing on being as eco-friendly and sustainable as possible, and launching more products.
"One of the products we're going to do, a percentage of the profits will go to charity, and those charities will be to do with helping the environment.
"We just want to look at with those new products not just that the packaging is sustainable but even have reusable value as well, so you can reuse the packaging for other purposes as well."
As well as having a support network, one of the keys to success for Johnson was basing her business on her core values.
"Our tagline is 'Good for the Earth, good for the soul', so I guess all the decisions we made were always coming back to that," she said.
She also saw a gap in the eco goods market, with a lack of products offering the luxury aspect. Her marketing background meant she did not have to contract out for the design of her logo and website.
She was optimistic about the future, and said being flexible helped her overcome obstacles.
"Our sales are picking up, our retail stores are picking up, we're expanding our product range, I feel like I'm more experienced in what people are really wanting out of their products as well."
Even when times were tough, people still wanted some affordable luxury for themselves, and to give as gifts, she said.
"I just feel like that's always going to be a need for people, having products that are good for the Earth and feel good for them at the same time.
"I think first and foremost whether you're an eco business or a non-eco business, really think about being sustainable because that's the way of the future."
