Family ‘bubble’ warn of virus’ seriousness
A family at the centre of the Birkdale cluster have spoken out after five members were struck down with Covid-19 and share a message for the country to take the virus seriously.
Kelvin*, 56, and his wife Sophia, 49, are in the Jet Park quarantine facility in Auckland after both catching the virus. They are two of the nearly 700 cases in the Delta outbreak that sent the country into lockdown.
In the same facility are their two daughters, along with Sophia’s mother Marion, aged 81, who have all been infected. They also know several others in the facility, including those associated with their daughters, and friends and relatives of those.
Symptoms among that wider group range from mild to severe.
They are part of what has come to be known as the Birkdale Social Network, which has more than 70 cases linked to it. It is the second-largest, behind the Māngere church group with at least 320 cases.
It is not yet known exactly how the virus spread through the Auckland community, also 17 cases reaching Wellington (all household contacts linked to the Auckland clusters).
Officials have linked cases in the outbreak genomically to a case in MIQ who arrived from Sydney at the Crowne Plaza in early August. Yet so far, no person-to-person link has been identified from there.
For Kelvin and Sophia’s family, it all started with a gathering on Sunday, August 15. Their two daughters and two friends were at the family home on Auckland’s North Shore for a little celebration. Less than 48 hours later, their worlds were turned upside down.
A flatmate of their two daughters, and one of their partners, was an employee of a certain Devonport tradesman. That tradesman, 58, became known as Case A, and on Tuesday, August 17, became one of the country’s most talked about people when he returned a positive Covid-19 test result — the first in the community in six months. It was also the first in the community of the highly infectious Delta variant.
The four in the flat rushed to get tested, and that evening found out they were all positive. None had experienced symptoms. The direction the virus travelled is not yet known, but a wide group of friends, family and workmates would go on to test positive. Most were under age 30. This core group was taken immediately into the Jet Park facility, as both Kelvin and Sophia, and Marion, who had her regular Monday visit from her granddaughters, urgently sought tests.
Sophia and Marion were both positive, but Kelvin’s first test came back negative. Two days later, he got a positive result and soon joined his wife at Jet Park.
Kelvin has had one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, while his wife has not received any (she was booked in for her first dose this week).
Kelvin, otherwise fit and healthy and someone who rarely gets sick, is wheezing as he speaks. Every few minutes, he stops to cough, a dry and raspy, almost choking cough. He’s never had asthma but his doctor has prescribed him a Pulmicort inhaler — a new treatment normally used for lung disease, but which has been found to reduce Covid symptoms.
He is constantly taking Paracetamol and Ibuprofen for a pain in his lower back and kidneys that won’t go away. But it’s the fevers that are doing his head in.
“It’s like a yoyo. I get the shivers, so I put something on, and then I get too hot, take it off and I am too cold. I’ve never really had the flu, so I don’t know what to compare it to.”
Each day is different, too. For Sophia, her experience has been milder, but she’s also been nauseous with vomiting and dysentery.
Marion, who the family were initially most concerned about due to her age, has ended up having the most mild of symptoms. She had one dose of the vaccine. Apart from a slight cough and runny nose, she has had an otherwise relaxed two weeks in quarantine.
“They make us very comfortable, and check in twice a day to make sure I am okay,” said Marion.
Meanwhile one in their group, a 29-year-old, spent a few days in hospital, at one point needing oxygen to help with his breathing.
“That was a pretty scary moment,” said Sophia. “It brought home the severity of the virus.”
That person was one of more than 40 who have ended up in hospital this outbreak, with seven in ICU. One person has died.
The rate of hospitalisations is double the country’s first outbreak last year, a trend consistent with Delta outbreaks overseas, along with how many young people it has affected. In this outbreak, two-thirds are aged below 34.
Both Kelvin and Sophia went to work in the two days after they were likely infected. All their colleagues had been self-isolating and none returned positive test results.
The earliest known possible case to Kelvin and Sophia was case A. He’d apparently experienced symptoms in the week prior to testing positive, and so, too, the employee.
One of their daughters started to feel very mild cold-like symptoms near the end of that week, but thought little of it — as most of the country would have at the time, given the number of colds going around.
Given the number of contacts they had all generated, the couple say it is “incredible” the outbreak has not been any larger.
“It’s just amazing that man got tested when he did and the country went straight into lockdown,” says Sophia. “It could have been so much worse.”
* The Herald on Sunday has omitted their surname to protect the privacy of other family members.
