ALL CHANGE IN THE POST-COVID OFFICE
The post-Covid future of the office is a subject making commercial office landlords around the world, including New Zealand, sweat.
One local architecture company has questioned how much space it needs and what it needs it for, as the Covid-19 lockdown presents the opportunity for change.
Context Architects principal Murray Jervis said the company could say to its clients seeking advice on how to operate with less space and more staff working remotely that it had done that and could advise on it.
He reckons the company could easily function with two-thirds of the space it has leased but surrendering part of it will be driven by the timing of lease renewals. It has offices in Auckland and Christchurch, with about 60 staff in Auckland and six in Christchurch.
Not long into the Covid lockdown, the company decided to go fully digital to enable it to change and adapt. Jervis says it was probably the busiest time for the leadership team in the company's 14-year history.
A lot of the telecommunications upgrade was carried out before lockdown so staff could work remotely, not just at home but in a cafe or library. Technology is the enabler of change and the company has always been an advocate of that, he says.
"One of the things Covid did is kind of make us question the way we were set up," Jervis says.
"We felt the world change that day. We felt slightly outdated, and we had a bit of a hierarchical structure.
"We were listening to some of the things Steve Jobs from Apple had said. He used to talk about them being the world's biggest startup, and you had to allow the best ideas from your people to filter quickly to the top, and when you had lots of hierarchy and management, that was really difficult."
So the company has turned its vertical structure into a much flatter one, with the business based around skill sets. It pulls people together for specific projects depending on their skill set rather than on whether they have been doing that job for a number of years.
"So the whole old structure has spun to meet the different kind of physical environment as well," Jervis says.
He forecasts that the office's function in the future will become the place where staff connect, meet and discuss ideas and meet clients. And the office will be part of the company's branding.
Pre-Covid, Context was operating fairly traditionally. Staff had their own desk, double monitors, cabinets to store their materials, and a desk phone.
Context removed its reception area. About a third of the desks and all personal metal storage cabinets were ditched and replaced with quite small lockers.
Into vacant space went tables and soft furniture for collaborative and meeting spaces. In those spaces, staff can sit and work with a laptop and talk with clients or have meetings with other staff members.
Any staff member can log on at any desk. All staff have been provided with a mobile phone and desk phones have been ditched.
"We're certainly not advocating that everybody works from home, but we're giving them the ability to do that if it suits them.
"It's very much if it works for you and if it works for the client and the team, then we're happy to experiment with it.
"It comes with a lot of caveats. There's a lot of trust involved both ways between ourselves and the team. I think one of the interesting things with Covid is that it sort of got rid of the trust question."
Pre-Covid, businesses had considered more remote working but were concerned about productivity. But employees proved they could and did work productively during lockdown.
The company has put in place other measures to connect with staff, such as quick questionnaires three times a week that take about 30 seconds to answer, on health and wellbeing so staff can ask for a call to management or the leadership team.
Because the office does not need as many desks, chairs, monitors and other hardware, staff have been allowed to take them home, so that helped ensure the home setup was good ergonomically. And a couple of staff have been on an ergonomics course to make sure home setups comply.
The leadership team created new policies and methodologies, including an online portal for staff, which had a lot of self-help guides to help them resolve most issues themselves.
"We're all about trying to make everybody do as well as they can, be the best they can be at their workplace."
Normally this time each year the company has an office ski trip for a long weekend but this year that was not possible, so they held a bring-a-plate winter solstice party.
"We're conscious that you've probably got to work a bit harder at the cohesion thing.
"What we are certainly reading and hearing is that productivity is boosted only when you combine working from anywhere with an office hub or a community base."
Pre-Covid, people worked pretty well at the office and during Covid pretty well at home.
"The sweet spot is somewhere in the middle. I guess with each individual business they will have a natural balancing point and for all of us it's trying to find where that is."
Management said to staff they thought the sweet spot might be three days in the office and two days at home but that was just a guide. Staff were to be available during working hours when clients and colleagues expect to get hold of them.
Some staff are in every day, quite a few come in irregularly, and the rest are working three days in the office and two at home. It's not a one-size-fits-all and people who don't have the space at home to work come in each day.
"It's early days. We will be monitoring how everybody is, how their mental health is, how they are physically performing, how we are performing as a business."
Jervis says commercial property is where the action will be in the future. Air New Zealand is trying to sublease 25 per cent of its head office in Auckland. He and colleagues expect there to be a lot of stressed properties in New Zealand in the future.
"As we are doing and a lot of the clients we are working for are finding out, they only need half the floor plate".
