LOCKDOWN GUIDELINES ADJUSTED
Police have made significant changes to their guidelines for frontline officers after it was revealed they had little power to enforce the lockdown unless they suspected someone has coronavirus.
On Saturday night, police released updated guidelines around alert level four rules. They provided clarity around what was acceptable bubble behaviour.
The rules, set out in a health notice issued by the director- general of health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield, include:
Everyone in New Zealand is to be isolated or quarantined at their current place of residence, except as permitted for essential personal movement.
Exercise is to be done in an outdoor place that can be readily accessed from home and 2-metre physical distancing must be maintained.
Recreation and exercise does not involve swimming, water- based activities (for example, surfing or boating), hunting, tramping, or other activities of a kind that expose participants to danger or may require search and rescue services.
A child can leave the residence of one joint caregiver to visit or stay at the residence of another joint caregiver (and visit or stay at that residence) if there is a shared bubble arrangement.
A person can leave their residence to visit or stay at another residence (and visit or stay at that residence) under a shared bubble arrangement if one person lives alone in one, or both, of those residences; or everyone in one of those residences is a vulnerable person.
Bloomfield said the guidance gave additional clarity around bubbles, and reinforced the ability of the police to enforce them.
"No-one likes a rule-breaker, especially when breaking the rules puts other New Zealanders' lives at risk.
"We've started well but now is not the time to be complacent.
"We need to be extra vigilant to move out of alert level four as soon as possible, and police have all the powers they need to make sure people not following the rules are dealt with."
New police commissioner Andrew Coster said the health notice made it clear what types of outdoor exercise and recreation people should not do.
"We want people to stay safe but if a small number of people persist in deliberately flouting the restrictions, police will have the discretion to warn or, if necessary, to arrest.
"The vast majority of New Zealanders have a high level of awareness of what they can and can't do under the alert level four restrictions and, by and large, people are doing a tremendous job."
The public should not notice any significant change to policing, he said.
"I have recently set a clear expectation of our staff on how we police in the current environment.
"We have today updated our operational guidelines to staff, to help them police with confidence and certainty."
Teen party scenario
In this scenario, police are called to a teenage party in a suburban house, with no parents home. This is not covered by the health notice as it is at a private address.
The occupier says they are a group of friends who - bar one - live together and are having a low-key gathering and hurting no-one.
To exclude the friend, "you would need to determine whether you believe that this situation is one where there is a substantial public health risk (for example if someone was displaying symptoms of Covid-19, were known to have Covid-19, or had recently returned from overseas)".
That has now changed. Police say travelling to the address to party, and then remaining there, is not one of the essential personal movements. Officers can now encourage them to leave and if they fail to comply, they can be arrested or fined up to $4000.
Couple in a car scenario
Police pull over a couple in a car who do not live together. The driver says they were food shopping and he will drop his girlfriend off on his way home.
Neither show coronavirus symptoms.
All police can do is speak to them about keeping themselves safe because there is "no significant public risk".
Under powers, the earlier document says: "Why have you stopped the vehicle? You have no powers relating to Covid-19 in regards to this. There is no significant public risk as neither are displaying Covid symptoms."
However, the new document says they cannot be physically in each other's presence, with a two- metre separation required.
"Allow them to drive home and advise them that if they do not desist, this is an offence."
Lawyer Nigel Hampton, QC, said it was "vital" for the public to understand what powers police had. "These are extraordinary times and extraordinary powers are being used or are available to used."
