Wave goodbye to sea, surfers warned
Police cracked down on surfers on Auckland’s west coast yesterday after all water-based activities were banned during the Covid-19 lockdown.
The Ministry of Health issued a Health Notice on Saturday which clarified that swimming, surfing, fishing and boating were not permitted while New Zealand was on alert level 4.
New Zealanders had previously been advised not to take part in these activities during the Covid-19 lockdown but the ban was made official in fresh laws released by the ministry.
That more explicit guidance had not yet got through to some surfers.
Police — who have been monitoring surf cameras to detect rule-breakers — turned up at Piha Beach yesterday morning, where about six people were in the water.
“They just went straight down to the beach and called the surfers in,” said a Herald photographer at the scene.
AUT journalism lecturer and Muriwai resident Richard Pamatatau said he saw two people out surfing at the main beach during his morning walk yesterday, and another person preparing to head out into the waves.
At Maori Bay, south of Muriwai, another six to eight people were surfing.
Pamatatau said people had been surfing since the lockdown came into force last week, possibly because the isolation guidelines had not been clear.
“But certainly the announcement [on Saturday] made it really clear that surfing is now a restricted activity,” he said yesterday.
It was frustrating for those residents who had been following the isolation rules, he said.
“Lots of us would want to be in the surf, that’s obvious. But for the good of the country, we just have to adhere to the level 4 lockdown.
“Those who continue to flout the restrictions in any form are playing on the good nature of most of us.
“That’s just not good enough. Any one of those people outside their bubble will want the same care and attention from the medical system, from the social welfare system, from the Government and a slew of handouts.
“But they are not behaving like the rest of us ... I think it’s time for people to grow up a little bit.”
Rodney Local Board chair Phelan Pirrie said there was a “steady stream” of surfers heading to the beach.
