BOAT-BUILD BOOM FROM COVID CRISIS
When Covid-19 first arrived in New Zealand last year and the whole country went into lockdown, the marine industry - like much of the business sector - held its breath and prepared for the choppy waters ahead.
"We thought, in an economic crisis, people don't need to go and buy new boats," Peter Busfield, executive director of the NZ Marine Industry Association, said. "So we were bracing for a pretty tough time." As it turned out, the opposite occurred.
Boat sales soared as Kiwis emerged from lockdown in 2020 - a trend also seen overseas - and there has been no going back since, with demand (and prices) continuing to climb entering summer 2021. "We were pleasantly surprised it had the reverse effect," Busfield said of Covid's arrival on New Zealand shores.
He said the number of new boat trailers registered in New Zealand so far this year (to the month of November) - new boats aren't registered, but trailers are - has increased by 8 per cent compared with 2020. "And last year was a good year, so the growth has continued on ... and that's gone through to other types of boats - yachts and launches."
Steve Clement is the owner of Hamilton-based Admiral Boats NZ, which builds luxury 10-metre sports cruisers that sell for around $500,000 and can sleep five people comfortably. He said they will have built two new boats by the end of this year and plan to build three next year.
He and his small team can't build them fast enough. People are calling wanting to look at the boats and asking Clement when he can get them built by.
"I'm telling people 2023," he said, before adding with a laugh, "man, how can we get them out quicker?"
"It's the best problem to have, I guess." For Steve Thomas, owner of NZ Boat Sales - which sells a lot in the high-end, luxury side of the market - there are simply not enough boats to meet demand.
"Normally we've got quite a good selection of boats for sale leading into summer, but this year it's been quite different. There's been a real shortage of boats, a bit like the housing market really - a lot of demand and not many boats for sale."
He said part of the problem is some boat owners in that price range don't want to sell and are holding on to what they've got for now because of a lack of upgrade options.
There are also supply issues in the high-end new boat market, Thomas said, with people having to wait four or five years for some makes and models due to "huge" international demand and production capacity that can't keep up. "So that's having an impact as well, that's pushing the demand for late-model, second-hand boats up, and pushing the prices up a little bit too."
NZ Boat Sales has a waiting list for buyers, and is "trying to find them boats to get into".
"They get snapped up quite often before they get to market, before you see them advertised," Thomas said. "I think because people can't travel internationally, they want to be able to spend time on the water at home. I suppose that translates to caravan sales and motorhomes and all that sort of thing - it's the same thing.
"What we are seeing too is people making lifestyle decisions ... it's enjoyment of life stuff, it's not all about work, it's about getting out and enjoying life with the family."
Thomas said he has seen about a 10 per cent increase in prices over the past 12 months for certain boats, especially brands that are well known. He said price rises are "inevitable" with demand outstripping supply, as well as high inflation and global supply chain issues.
"People are just expecting it to happen, really ... but what we are seeing is a bit of frustration from buyers because we can't get them into a boat they want to get into."
Demand is also high, if not higher, at the other end of the market. "Life's good," Russell Hewitt, owner of Marine and Boating BOP, told Stuff.
Hewitt has been running his Te Puke-based business for more than 20 years, selling new and used boats, outboard motors, parts and accessories, and providing services and repairs. He said he noticed an uptick in sales straight after the first Covid-19 lockdown last year, and it has just kept "increasing, increasing, increasing".
Marine and Boating BOP is selling three or four boats a week right now, mostly on commission, and mainly second-hand.
Hewitt also buys and on-sells boats after repairing, cleaning and dressing them up.
He said as well as "new people coming aboard" and buying their first boats, there are a lot of long- time boaties looking for an upgrade - a bigger or newer boat, or a new motor.
"A lot of the guys are spending a lot more time on the water, whether it's fishing or whether it's just general boating ... they're certainly using their boats more."
That's also leading to more service and repair work for Hewitt.
He said there have been supply issues and major delays getting new motors and parts into the country, which, along with the high demand, has led to price increases.
Hewitt puts the boat business boom down to people not going on overseas holidays and having more money to spend. He said a lot of their boat sales are through Trade Me.
