NO COVID-19 GRADE BUMP AT VICTORIA UNIVERSITY
Thousands of students at Victoria University are calling for a grade bump to recognise the hardship experienced during the Covid-19 lockdown.
Universities across New Zealand are making changes to their marking, including bumping marks up a letter grade, or asking teaching staff to be less critical in grading. But Victoria University has decided against a change in marking criteria.
Students at the university have told Stuff that decision will disadvantage them when competing against students from other universities for jobs and places in postgraduate courses.
Ella Childs, a fourth-year biomedical science and psychology student, said every student had been impacted by Covid-19 in some way.
"Our big concern is students who are applying for competitive courses, or scholarships, or going into the job market, are competing against students from other universities, but their GPA [grade point average] will be lower, because the other universities scaled them up.
"We think that is incredibly unfair."
Not every student had the opportunity to study from home, due to childcare, or limited internet.
Fourth-year law and international relations student Lachlan Craig said coronavirus had made students' lives more difficult.
"The grade increase has already been given to other universities, like Auckland and Otago, which kind of puts us at a disadvantage relative to them too."
Childs and Craig have set up a Facebook group for students to come together and campaign to get the university to change their minds.
In the first 12 hours, more than 4000 students had joined the group.
Academic vice president at the Victoria University of Wellington Students Association (VUWSA), Taylah Shuker, said she was disappointed to learn there would be no grade bump.
"There are huge parity concerns from many students around the fact that students at Vic will be disadvantaged compared to students at Auckland and Otago."
Some measures, such as allowing extensions without medical certificates and reduced course loads, had been a positive step, but Shuker said some academic staff were not allowing them.
"We really want security around these measures, as well as this grade bump."
VUWSA has launched a petition, and released letter templates for students to use when writing to Victoria University's senior leadership teams.
Isabella Lenihan-Ikin, president of the New Zealand Union of Students' Associations, said she wanted to see a consistent approach across New Zealand's universities.
Currently, some are offering a grade increase, with others using a more lenient grading system.
Victoria University's academic vice- provost, Stuart Brock, confirmed there would be no blanket policy to bump grades up for trimester one.
"The university will, however, ensure that robust moderation procedures are in place for all courses this year, and that scaling of grades in an upward direction will occur in courses where appropriate."
She said the university was also exploring the option of adding a statement to students' transcripts, indicating students enrolled in 2020 were impacted by a global pandemic.
"The university has taken other interventions to recognise and accommodate the barriers and stresses that the Covid-19 situation has imposed on our students."
That included offering extensions on assignments, not requiring medical certificates when applying to miss exams and giving alternative assessments for students in special circumstances.
Auckland University was the first to offer an across the board grade bump.
A spokesperson for Otago University confirmed they were increasing grades by 5 per cent, equivalent to a letter grade.
Waikato Massey and Lincoln universities all confirmed to Stuff they were using a mechanism called "impaired performance", where students were graded against their previous performance, as well as other student cohorts.
Canterbury University confirmed it would grade students against previous cohorts, and scaling would be applied when it advantaged students.
