CONFUSION ON COVID STRATEGY
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern says the strategy remains the same: Stamp out Covid-19.
But the planned "transition" out of lockdown restrictions in Auckland, and the shift away from the elimination strategy, has created more questions than answers.
Has the Government's aim now become suppression or "containment" of the virus? What level of community spread and sickness will be tolerated before restrictions are deployed? What does the incoming strategy mean for the upcoming summer?
And what does the end of elimination mean for the strict border restrictions that have thousands of New Zealanders stranded abroad until early 2022?
"We were going to have to grapple with some of these questions," said Michael Plank, a University of Canterbury professor with expertise in modelling viruses' spread.
He said New Zealand was always going to face "tough decisions", but the current outbreak of the more-infectious Delta strain of the virus had forced this moment earlier than hoped.
As the Government slightly loosens restrictions in the coming weeks, Plank said the country will face two scenarios for the coming summer.
The optimistic scenario is that a combination of restrictions and vaccinations keeps a lid on the virus' spread and hospitalisations, until high vaccination rates are reached.
The pessimistic scenario - akin to what is occurring in Melbourne - is that New Zealand finds itself "in the middle of a significant wave", placing the healthcare system under immense strain.
"The biggest question I have at the moment is how quickly are cases going to rise . . . And if they do rise quickly, what is the Government going to do about it?"
Ardern offered some answers yesterday, but also straddled a confusing dichotomy.
The day before, she said that New Zealand was transitioning from an elimination strategy which "has served us incredibly well". Less than 24 hours later, she said it was not "black and white" that elimination was being abandoned.
Much of the new plan is yet to be drawn up. Ardern has said the Government was developing a new framework for when Auckland leaves alert level 3.
It appears this could amount to a new alert level system "that reflects a more vaccinated population". There will also be a new tool, vaccine certification, that will limit access to events to only those who have been fully vaccinated.
But exactly how some of these tools will now be applied to outbreaks remains unclear - for example, what vaccination level will be considered satisfactory when it comes to restrictions tightening or easing.
How an outbreak spreads will also be relevant. But again, this is somewhat vague.
One possibility is that, as occurred with Waikato this week, parts of a region can be locked down if vaccination rates aren't up to scratch.
On the border restrictions preventing thousands from returning to New Zealand, Ardern said the plan to gradually ease the country's tight border restrictions early in 2022 had not changed.
