Landlord removed from flat in handcuffs
An Auckland woman is living in fear after her landlord tried repeatedly to move into her flat during the Covid-19 lockdown, claiming it was his house and he had nowhere else to go.
But the man, who was handcuffed by police and is now staying in a taxpayer-funded lockdown hotel, claims he was simply following Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern’s advice by going home to stay in his bubble.
“There was an empty room and this is my house,” Mark Philip told the Herald. “Where am I supposed to go? Whose bubble am I supposed to infect?”
Rachel, 30, and her four flatmates called police twice on the first day of lockdown after Philip turned up at their Mt Eden rental, insisting it was his permanent residence.
The third time, they say, he gained access by dashing inside when they went to answer knocking at the door.
Under the lockdown rules people are supposed to remain in the house where they slept the night before the restrictions began and non-essential movement is not permitted.
The flatmates have now fashioned internal locks to keep Philip out and devised a secret knocking system to identify themselves.
Rachel — who would only give her first name to prevent jeopardising future rental opportunities — is an essential worker in the Covid-19 pandemic response.
She rented a room in the four-bedroom villa on March 16 for $220 a week. Though she understood Philip had lived at the property previously, the rooms were all occupied when she moved in last month. She and her flatmates are adamant he no longer resided there.
“He’s saying he doesn’t have any other place to go. But if he gains access to the property, I’ll feel like my safety has been completely compromised. There’s nothing normal about this situation.”
On Thursday, March 26 — day one of the lockdown — Philip arrived about 10.30am and told the flatmates he was moving in. He wanted to take an empty room vacated by another flatmate the previous day.
Rachel said the flatmates refused and called police, who escorted him off the property in handcuffs.
But he returned that afternoon, and again insisted on entering.
Police confirmed they were called to the house twice that day, “after threats had reportedly been made by one party at the location”.
The two incidents would be taken into consideration if he committed further breaches, police said.
Rachel said the flatmates were advised to call 111 if Philip returned.
He is currently embroiled in Tenancy Tribunal proceedings with her other flatmates.
But Philip told the Herald he’d lived at the house intermittently for the past eight years. He was regularly overseas on business but considered it his permanent home. There was no tenancy agreement in place.
Philip said it made sense for him to stay there during lockdown.
“I did everything that Jacinda Ardern told me to. For the purposes of the lockdown, I chose a place to live ... I’m part of that bubble.”
Philip said the situation was “an outrage” and he planned to file a complaint with the Independent Police Conduct Authority.
