300 FEWER PEOPLE DIED during NZ lockdown
Three hundred fewer people died during the Covid-19 lockdown compared with recent years, even as thousands of patient appointments were cancelled and GPs closed their doors to all but the most urgent cases.
The Ministry of Health has published a report examining the impact of Covid-19 on hospital and general practice activity, which was reduced to all but the most essential services during lockdown to contain the virus, and how any changes affected patient health. As expected, it showed a drastic reduction in people in hospital, with 40,000 fewer people discharged from hospital in April alone, the peak of the lockdown. Planned care in hospitals halved in April and the data shows this reduction, as well as a reduction in emergency care, disproportionately affected Maori and Pasifika people.
The number of people waiting more than four months for medical treatment also grew during April and, again, Maori and Pacific people were disproportionately affected by additional delays.
"Clear planning is needed to keep reducing inequities as a key focus during the recovery phase," the report said. After a rush of people attending their GP practice before alert level 4 was imposed on March 26 - many to get their flu jab - appointments with GPs and community nurses also dropped precipitously during lockdown.
However, despite this disruption, the report said early evidence showed the mortality rate over the lockdown period was lower than in any of the previous five years, with 300 fewer deaths.
"The data suggests that from the last week of March to the last week of May, just under 300 fewer deaths occurred than would be expected based on the five-year average."
And despite the reduction in access to care, patents did not report an increase in health problems going untreated over lockdown.
The report did not take into account any pre-existing unmet need, or any projected increase in need over time outside of lockdown. It also did not offer an explanation for why fewer people had died than expected.
But Dr Bryan Betty, medical director of the Royal College of General Practitioners, said fewer respiratory illnesses and the unprecedented "zero- flu season" played a major role.
The flu season normally kills close to 500 people a year. Experts have said it is possible not a single person died of flu in New Zealand in 2020.
"The probable reason is that there was much less respiratory illness this year," he said.
"That is probably a big driver in what is happening. It is those basic health measures we took for Covid-19 which have had a profound effect on illnesses."
The report also showed that hospital activity bounced back quickly as the lockdown eased. More surgeries occurred in June this year compared with the same month the previous year as hospitals began to address backlogs, according to the report.
Last week, Stuff reported that the country's lockdown-induced cancer care backlog had been cleared, with the number of diagnoses back to pre-Covid- 19 levels. The Cancer Society said it was possible 400 cancer patients would die if the backlog was not cleared quickly.
