Kiwi ship passenger has virus
Diamond Princess in lockdown in Japan after coronavirus found onboard
One of 13 New Zealanders on a cruise ship in Japan has tested positive for coronavirus.
New Zealand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was providing consular assistance to the sick Diamond Princess passenger in Japan’s second largest city, Yokohama.
Mfat would not provide any further information about the person.
Health workers said 10 more people from the Diamond Princess were confirmed ill with the virus, in addition to 10 others who tested positive on Wednesday.
“[The latest infections] include four Japanese guests, one guest from Taiwan, two Americans, two Canadians and one guest from New Zealand,” a Carnival Cruise spokesman said.
They were being taken to hospital immediately by local public health authorities for further tests and treatment. Most were in their 60s and 70s.
The ship would now remain in Yokohama under quarantine for at least 14 days.
“The health and safety of our guests and crew remains our top priority. We continue to work closely with the Japan Ministry of Health on all protocols and procedures while ensuring the comfort of our guests,” the spokesman said.
The ship would go to sea before returning to Yokohama where food, provisions and other supplies will be brought onboard, the company said.
“Guests will continue to be provided complimentary internet and telephone to stay in contact with their family and loved ones, and the ship’s crew is working to keep all guests comfortable.”
Thirty-three people are now confirmed to be infected with coronavirus in Japan. Globally, the virus has killed more than 560 people and sickened more than 28,000.
CNN reported that the ship docked and was placed under quarantine after a former passenger was confirmed to have the deadly virus.
The passenger, who disembarked the ship 12 days ago, is now in a stable condition in Hong Kong.
But those still aboard have been put on lockdown and all passengers are under quarantine. Passengers aboard the Princess have shared pictures of masked, gowned health workers aboard the ship.
Masked staff were snapped delivering breakfast to guests’ rooms.
Health Minister Katsunobu Kato told a news conference on Wednesday morning that the then 10 confirmed cases were among the results of the 273 people tested so far.
There are 2666 guests and 1045 crew members on board the ship, Princess Cruises told CNN News.
People who had shown symptoms such as fevers or those who had been in close contact with others displaying symptoms of the virus were tested by health officials, public broadcaster NHK reported.
Cruises due to depart Yokohama and the western Japanese port of Kobe are cancelled because of delays related to the coronavirus checks, Carnival’s Princess Cruises Japan said on Tuesday.
