Court in lockdown over fears of Covid
Reports that person had symptoms prompted action
Within 20 minutes of opening the Hamilton District Court was put into lockdown yesterday after concerns a woman had Covid-19 symptoms.
The woman, who was waiting for a scheduled appearance, worked in a Hamilton managed isolation facility. She had her mandatory Covid-19 test on Tuesday and was still awaiting the results.
The Herald understands she told a court worker that she had a runny nose, but was otherwise fine. This was denied by the woman’s employer but the building was closed shortly afterwards.
The Ministry of Justice, which runs the court, would not confirm whether there was any mention of a runny nose but adopted its protocol of locking down facilities to deal with Covid-19 concerns.
A Ministry of Health spokesperson said the lockdown action was “precautionary” and “taken by local agencies after some initial reports that the person had symptoms consistent with Covid-19”.
“The Ministry of Health acknowledges our border workers’ willingness to undergo regular Covid-19 tests that are helping keep all New Zealanders safe from Covid-19.
“These people do not need to stay home — unless they develop symptoms.”
A Hamilton 82-year-old, who only wanted to be known as Jan, said her son was the last person to enter the courthouse just before it closed at 9.20am yesterday.
The last words she heard from her son, Wally Grimes, were “Mum, you can’t come in”.
“I looked at him and said ‘why?’ And then two security staff said the building was in lockdown.”
The incident saw everyone from police prosecutors to lawyers to accused to family members all left lingering out the front of the building until they caught wind of the lockdown.
Inside, everyone was given masks and all they could do was stare longingly out into the bright blue Hamilton sky.
It would be two hours later before Grimes, and the rest of those inside, were allowed out after being deemed “casual contacts” by the Ministry of Health.
Grimes said frustrations were beginning to build after a short time as they weren’t being told anything.
“They just said no one in, no one out, they gave us a mask.”
Hand sanitiser was also given out.
“There was a lot of people getting frustrated, getting angry, but the security did what they could ... they were getting agitated at being locked up.”
There was a young mum at the court with her baby and she only had a small amount of feed left in the bottle she had on her.
“At least I don’t have to be locked up for 14 days,” he said.
However, they were given information about where to go and who to ring if they did end up with symptoms.
By midday, it had been confirmed the woman had tested negative.
But the upheaval was huge.
With more than 50 people scheduled to appear, many turned up only to be told to go home again.
However, those in custody eventually had their cases called.
Despite denying she had symptoms, the woman’s employer praised the efficiency of both the Justice and Health ministries’ response.
