GOVT PLANNING FOR VACCINE distribution in lockdown
New details have emerged in the government's hunt for a Covid-19 vaccine distributor - including the requirement to be able to move doses through road blocks during another lockdown.
The exacting requirements for any prospective vaccine distributors have emerged in a Ministry of Health procurement document obtained by Stuff. They include the ability to distribute dangerously large quantities of dry ice and transport items at ultra-cold temperatures, down to -70C.
Interested companies are also asked about contingency plans for delivering a vaccine during another Covid-19 lockdown scenario, including whether they would be able to handle disruptions to their networks such as road blocks.
Up to six warehouses will be used to store the vaccine before it is spirited off to more than 1000 distribution points.
Near the end of last year, the Ministry went to market with a request for information aimed at transport companies able to distribute the vaccine around the country.
Information provided to suppliers says the process will not result in a contract being awarded. Instead, it aims to gather information about how the vaccine could be transported by the private sector from warehouses to providers.
The programme is part of the Covid-19 vaccine strategy taskforce, an all-of-government effort to ensure New Zealand has enough safe and effective coronavirus vaccines at the earliest possible time, according to a Request for Information document available to suppliers.
"A critical responsibility of the programme is to establish a robust supply chain that can successfully deliver vaccines and consumables to the immunisation site" the document says.
New Zealand has already entered into several advanced purchase agreements for vaccines.
They include an agreement for 1.5 million doses of the Pfizer- BioNTech vaccine, which needs to be stored between -80C and -60C, according to the United States Centre for Disease Control.
"The Ministry of Health is seeking to partner with a distributor who can meet the challenging and changing requirements of vaccine and consumable distribution."
Any supplier would need to have a nationwide network, the document says. "Most likely the product will be originating from 2-6 warehouses to over 1000 delivery points and would need to be delivered with urgency, speed and high visibility."
The document asks various questions of suppliers, including: Can the network store and transport items at -70C?
Can it move dry ice packed shipments in quantiles large enough to be considered dangerous goods?
Can the supplier offer same-day and overnight services?
Do they have experience in live monitoring of the temperature of goods in transport?
Do they have contingency plans for delivery in a Covid-19 lockdown scenario?
What is their ability to handle transportation disruption during another lockdown, including road blocks?
