In brief
In brief
Tenor stuck in transitSol3 Mio tenor Pene Pati could be on his way home from London next week after being denied an emergency application for a quarantine spot. The performer was in Germany when authorities announced a new Covid-19 lockdown, and after other performances in Europe were scrapped, Pati was forced to head home. However, Pati was kicked off the tarmac in London because he did not have a voucher for New Zealand’s quarantine facilities. Travellers to New Zealand must now have a managed isolation voucher otherwise they will not be allowed to board their flight. The allocation system applies to any flights arriving from November 3. “We definitely didn’t account for this type of thing,” he told Newstalk ZB’s Kerre McIvor. “I was already mid-transit and that made it even harder, in my heart I was halfway home.” A travel agent contacted him and has been working to find him a spot in quarantine.
Teacher to be freedThe Blenheim teacher jailed for sexually abusing two schoolboys over more than a year in what was described as “gross” offending will soon be released from prison. Last December Jaimee Marie Cooney — the wife of a police officer and mother of two — was sentenced in the Blenheim District Court to two years and six months in jail for her offending. Following a Parole Board hearing she will be freed after spending 10 months behind bars. Cooney pleaded guilty to a raft of charges relating to two teenage boys who she sexually abused, often in cars parked in public places, and in school lunch breaks. She became eligible for parole on October 17 and appeared before the board for a second time yesterday, where they approved her release. She will be subject to a number of strict conditions.
$67m cruise ship berth emptyThere are no bookings for a new $67 million cruise ship berth in Lyttelton, ahead of its expected opening this month. The Lyttelton Port Company had aimed to finish its new berth by November 2020, and despite interruptions by Covid-19, it will open on time and on budget. The berth was 148m long, would include amenities for users, and had a walkway to shelter cruise ship passengers. Despite Covid-19 wreaking havoc on construction projects across New Zealand, Mike Simmers, LPC’s infrastructure and property general manager, said the project was finished on time and under the $67m budget, in time for an opening later this month. “We had over 80 [cruise ships] that we were planning for this season, now we are planning for no cruise vessels.”
No easing of strict conditionsA white supremacist banned from Christchurch’s two mosques and from having contact with all Muslims has failed in a third bid to ease strict conditions after his release from prison. Philip Neville Arps, 45, who was sentenced to 21 months in prison last June for spreading disturbing footage of the Al Noor Mosque massacre, was freed from custody on January 29. Release conditions included that Arps is electronically-monitored with a GPS tracker, an ankle bracelet that will trigger alerts if he enters “exclusion zones” around Al Noor Mosque and Linwood Masjid where the shootings happened. It came after the Department of Corrections applied for extra release conditions, including a blanket internet ban, inspections of any electronic device capable of accessing the internet, counselling, and drug or alcohol treatment programmes. Arps unsuccessfully challenged the extra conditions in the District and High Courts. He has now been refused leave to appeal in a higher court.
