Conference a tonic, but Covid still gatecrashes
After a torrid week being shouted down by anti-vax protesters, dealing with Covid-19 cases popping up in unexpected places and the strain of Auckland’s lockdown, a bit of time in front of the Labour home fires was possibly the tonic Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern needed.
The annual conference was far from the usual party conference for her. It was the first since she secured a historic win: a majority government. But there was none of the dramatic staging, no walk-on music, no booming standing ovation or hoopla or gossiping over the savouries.
Instead, the party faithful were in their homes watching on computer screens as Ardern sat in her Allbirds slippers (she calls them shoes) in a small room in Labour’s headquarters in Wellington.
The timing of her speech meant it was inevitable Covid-19 would gatecrash it.
Just before Ardern started talking, the daily update landed with news of a new record number of cases — topping the 200 mark for the first time.
But the conference did at least give her a chance to talk about something other than Covid-19 — and having it all online meant there were no protesters to contend with.
The policy announcement of the day was an underwhelming boost to Working for Families entitlements and the weekly Best Start payment for parents of newborn babies. Most was simply inflation adjustment for the past four years.
The Government is adding an extra $5 a week on top of that inflation adjustment — and that top-up will cost $272 million over four years.
That is small change compared to the $5.3 billion that has gone into business support and wage subsidies during the three months of the Delta outbreak.
It will not be a game changer, but it was at least something — and a reminder of the policy issue central to Ardern’s manifesto in the pre-Covid days: child poverty.
Ardern’s speech did of course address Covid-19. She told party members that the response was also underpinned by Labour values.
“We will protect our health system. We will keep adapting and evolving but we will always first and foremost protect lives and livelihoods.”
She also delivered a checklist of progress against other policy areas — from home insulation to conservation and climate change.
The party members passed a new rule to allow the Labour Party caucus to elect a new leader if an MP had the support of more than two thirds of that caucus. That would mean the wider electoral college vote of party members and affiliated unions is not needed. It is designed in case Ardern decides to leave while still Prime Minister, to allow a speedy handover to another leader.
