Water warningThe head of Watercare says if New Zealand wasn’t in the Covid-19...
Water warningThe head of Watercare says if New Zealand wasn’t in the Covid-19 lockdown, mandatory water restrictions would have been introduced for Auckland due to the low levels in the region’s dams. Auckland’s nine water storage dams, in the Hūnua and Waitākere Ranges, are just 52 per cent full as the drought continues to bite. While encouraging Aucklanders to continue to wash their hands, Watercare is asking them to think carefully before turning their taps on and especially to limit outdoor water use. Chief executive Raveen Jaduram said if it weren’t for the lockdown, Watercare would impose mandatory restrictions on Auckland. “We feel that people are feeling anxious and worried already because of Covid-19 and we don’t want to add to the stress by putting on restrictions,” he said.
Killer kept insideOne of New Zealand’s youngest murderers — who gunned down his caregiver when he was just 13 — has been refused parole and described as being “over-confident” about his ability to manage life on the outside. Jordan Nelson was jailed for 18 years for murdering his caregiver, Rosemaree Kurth, 50, at her home near New Plymouth in April 2012. Nelson, now 21, shot Kurth while her partner Kerry Lock tended to cattle. After stealing money from the couple, he fled to Waitara in a stolen car where he was arrested. He pleaded guilty to murder but was not sentenced to life imprisonment. Justice Paul Heath said that in light of Nelson’s culpability and having regard to his age, brain development and personal circumstances it would be “manifestly unjust” to sentence him to life behind bars.Police overdid itThe police watchdog says Christchurch police officers used unnecessary force when they hit a man on the head with a gun and let a police dog bite him for almost a minute. The man was arrested early in the morning on Saturday, September 30, 2017, after driving dangerously through the city in a ute with four passengers and failing to stop when signalled. Several police cars chased the truck for 21 minutes, while its occupants threw building tools out a broken window, into their path. The pursuit came to a stop in Latimer Square when the ute crashed into a police car. The Independent Police Conduct Authority said officers did not need to arm themselves, or use dogs or forceful tactics when they arrested the driver. The IPCA said the pursuit was justified, but officers did not follow policy during the chase so they put the public at risk. In a statement, the police said several of the officers involved had since received more training.
