NZTA TO BORROW $425M TO HELP FILL FUNDING HOLE
The Government has been forced to plug a $1 billion hole in the transport budget thanks to a steep drop in revenue during the Covid-19 lockdown.
It will allow Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) to borrow $425 million to fill a funding gap for the 2019/20 year, and the Government will give the agency $600m from the Covid-19 fund to plug the rest of the hole.
Transport Minister Phil Twyford said the additional money meant work could continue on building transport infrastructure. "Waka Kotahi will have the funding needed to keep building infrastructure despite lower revenue being collected from petrol excise duty and road user charges due to Covid. This means we will continue to roll out our road maintenance programme, complete projects like the Waikato Expressway, and get new projects like the Manawatu Gorge replacement highway under way."
He has also let NZTA know that it could borrow a further $300m should Covid-19 put further pressure on its finances.
NZTA spends roughly $4b a year on transport. Most of that is spent on building and maintaining roads, and on subsidising public transport. The money comes mainly from fuel taxes and road user charges, which plummeted during the lockdown as people stayed at home.
To make matters worse, NZTA's costs shot up during the lockdown, as it increased spending to subsidise public transport, and was forced to wrestle with renegotiating a deal on the Transmission Gully PPP.
Data collected by ANZ bank shows just how little driving was going on during levels 4 and 3.
In level 4, weekday car traffic was just 23 per cent of what it was a year ago and just 13 per cent of what it normally was on weekends. In terms of heavy vehicles like trucks, weekday traffic was just 47 per cent of what it was a year earlier on weekdays and just 34 per cent at weekends.
Level 3 traffic rebounded but was still significantly short of where it was last year.
Weekday heavy traffic was 81 per cent of what it was last year, while weekday car traffic was just 59 per cent. It wasn't until level 2 that heavy traffic got back to 100 per cent of where it had been, while car traffic was still sitting at 90 per cent of normal levels.
