PRINCIPAL REJECTS 'NORMAL' 2021
Ten months since New Zealand ground to a halt during the coronavirus lockdown, the effects are still being felt. In the third instalment of Stuff's Covid Diaries, reporters revisit New Zealanders to see how they are managing the impact of Covid-19. Josephine Franks reports
--------------------
The start of a new school year typically means a clean slate: brightly polished shoes, box-fresh stationery, new subjects and unfamiliar teachers.
But as the students of south Auckland's Kia Aroha College crowded its classrooms last week, principal Haley Milne anticipated the effects of Covid-19 being felt well into this year.
Last year, the school threw everything it had at making sure its pupils - and their families - had the basics during lockdown, delivering food parcels and forking out its own money to get students online.
Covid-19 threw the inequalities of New Zealand's education system into sharp focus. But as a new school year dawns, Milne worries leaders in education will take the attitude that because devices have been distributed, the problem has been fixed.
"The challenge is making sure we don't miss the opportunity to do some big changes in the education system rather than go, we've got laptops and there's no systemic change."
Milne wants to see an overhaul in the way resources are distributed - and how society feels about some communities getting more than others. "The problem with New Zealand society is we're not courageous enough to say this school needs a bit more, this one needs more than that, this one is actually pretty well resourced already and doesn't need much.
"Until as a society we're okay with that I'm sceptical about how much change is going to happen."
After the second lockdown, there was a rush to try to get back to normal. Milne is worried that in 2021 people will be quick to forget the lessons of 2020. "The phrasing of normal is dangerous. Normal wasn't good for everyone."
She's also concerned that any potential progress will get held up in a quagmire of endless discussion. "I envisage us sitting and talking about internet access and laptops for children for years while we unpack all the hurdles, whereas if we change our focus into making it happen we'd just get things done a lot faster.
"Education is about learning and about doing something about what we've learnt. If nothing changes then we actually probably didn't learn much."
Milne is expecting to see the mental health ramifications of the pandemic play out this year. Anxiety was particularly high in her community during the second lockdown, when cases were clustered in the area. There's also the delayed impact of not being able to grieve properly, Milne said.
For families who lost somebody in a time when they couldn't go through the normal communal grieving processes, it's likely that will resurface this year, she said.
As part of the school's application to the Urgent Response Fund, the school got funding for counselling services, which Milne hoped to put in place this term.
Despite the challenges of 2020, Kia Aroha had an "awesome" end to last year, she said.
"It was a testament of our community to say we're not going to be defined by one moment."
After a year of focusing on wellbeing and making sure families were fed, Milne claimed their NCEA results were "remarkable".
