Melbourne returnees very unlikely to bring in Covid
Experts are confident that the risk of returnees to New Zealand on “green flights” this week bringing the Covid-19 virus with them remains “very low”, despite 11 community cases reported in Melbourne yesterday.
New Zealand paused its quarantine-free travel arrangements with Victoria on May 25 after the Australian state entered lockdown amid a Covid-19 outbreak, stranding thousands of travellers.
After he lockdown was extended for parts of the state last week, New Zealand continued the pause while opening up options for people to return home from Wednesday without needing to go into managed isolation.
Authorities said the lockdown meant they would have spent the equivalent of two weeks in isolation. Travellers also need to return a negative Covid-19 test before flying.
Director-General of Health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said last week the risk of those returning — who also would be tested on arrival — bringing Covid-19 with them was “very low”.
That was a view shared by epidemiologist Dr Michael Baker, despite yesterday’s cases and concerns over the new, more infectious Delta variant rising.
He recognised that some people in New Zealand could be nervous, as this was the first time travellers would be able to return from a destination overseas experiencing an outbreak without needing managed isolation, but said there were “very good measures in place”.
However, Baker said he was more concerned about what was happening within New Zealand.
“Overseas, where the vaccination rates are up around 70 per cent, they are seeing really good results. It is good to see the vaccination rate here increasing too, but really it will take months before we are at a point anywhere near being able to pause any community transmission, so we need to keep the pressure on.”
Recently other countries in the Asia-Pacific region that had pursued an elimination strategy, such as Taiwan, had seen large outbreaks.
Baker said this was down to the emergence of new, highly infectious variants, along with community and government complacency.
He said the current alert system in New Zealand needed to be reviewed, and he wanted to see scanning QR codes compulsory for “high-risk” locations such as nightclubs and gyms.
As New Zealand continued to pursue travel arrangements, Baker said the “three-tier” green, amber and red country system could also be further refined, along with building specialist quarantine facilities for travellers from high-risk countries.
It was also “highly concerning” that not all border workers and airline staff had been vaccinated yet, Baker said.
“That is totally unacceptable. They have had months to do so.”
Air New Zealand has unveiled its special “green flight” schedule for eligible travellers to return from Victoria to New Zealand.
There will be two flights a day between Melbourne and Auckland from tomorrow, and daily flights from Melbourne to Queenstown, Wellington and Christchurch from Friday, June 11.
