Fears for rehab property
After the closure of a much-loved disability facility in Auckland during lockdown, one of its most successful fundraisers wants to know how it failed. Isaac Davison reports
The Laura Fergusson Rehabilitation centre in Greenlane closed in March, blaming financial difficulties. The centre — which provided rehab services and respite care — had been set to close in August but that was brought forward by the first Covid-19 lockdown.
There are now concerns the $40m property in Greenlane could be sold or converted into a rest home.
Dame Rosie Horton chaired the Laura Fergusson Trust Women’s Committee in the mid-1980s and was also a trustee. “I am devastated by what is happening at the Laura Fergusson Trust,” said Horton, who is in Australia while Covid-19 lockdowns are in place.
“When we raised the initial funds, it was to ensure the comfort and rehabilitation of the disabled in a stand-alone facility planned to remain for many lifetimes.”
The trust is no longer a fundraising powerhouse and received the bulk of its funding through ACC and the Ministry of Health. It declared a loss of $1 million in the 2019 financial year and said in its financial statements that it was not sustainable to continue providing services.
Its 2019 financial statements show a $570,000 spend on consultants, including a $94,000 payment for a report by the trust’s chairman Chris O’Brien.
A letter from Paul Hunt QC to the trust said that payment to O’Brien appeared to breach the trust’s deed, which said trustees should not pay themselves directly or indirectly.
The letter was sent on behalf of businesswoman and city councillor Victoria Carter, whose niece previously used the rehab facility. Three weeks on, no response has been received. O’Brien’s report, and a separate report by PWC Wellington, which is likely to have been a factor in the centre’s closure, have not been released. Neither the trust’s board or the centre’s executive could not be reached for comment.
Carter said that in the absence of information, there were fears that the valuable Greenlane site could be sold or repurposed.
“It would be a tragedy for the disabled of Auckland if they lost a facility that did the work that Laura Fergusson was renowned for.”
At the time of Laura Fergusson’s closing, disability advocates said it highlighted the underfunding of the sector.
But Horton said that if the trust had been proactive and transparent about its funding problems she believed there would have been an outpouring of support from Aucklanders. “It was the original generosity of the Auckland community and business supporters that made the trust facilities possible,” she said.
Ministry of Health deputy director-general Adri Isbister said the trust had not asked for financial assistance before closing and only informed the ministry of its plan to exit its $4m contract after it made its decision.
The trust did not take up an offer from the ministry to explore ways to keep operating, and declined a meeting with director-general Ashley Bloomfield. The ministry said alternative support services had now been found for people who had used Laura Fergusson.
Among them was Blake Brookland, 23, who has a development disorder called Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS). He required 24-hour care and had stayed in respite care at Laura Fergusson two days a week. His father Billy said Spectrum Care had now stepped in to provide respite care, but only on a short-term basis, and the family were fearful. Billy said that in his opinion: “We thought Laura Fergusson would be there for the rest of his life. It’s disgraceful, and they have got a lot to answer for.”
