Collins vows to deal to meth menace
National Party leader Judith Collins waltzed into Hawke’s Bay yesterday determined to put methamphetamine harm back on the political agenda.
Relegated to something of a side issue in a year dominated by Covid-19 lockdown and the associated economic freefall, Collins claimed the Government had put controlling the drug in the “too-hard basket”, at huge social cost.
She announced an uncosted party policy which would tackle supplies coming into prisons, target organised crime networks, increase drug dogs at airports and establish a $50 million contestable fund for reduction programmes. It would also use a health response modelled on the Matrix programme implemented in the 1990s in the United States to tackle its cocaine epidemic.
Collins told media following her campaign at the Napier War Memorial Conference Centre that wastewater testing showed meth accounted for more than half of New Zealand’s detected drugs, and caused up to $1 billion a year in social harm.
“What the numbers hide is the individual tragedy and the tragedies of those who fall victim to meth, the families ripped apart by meth and the victims who suffer the consequences of violent attacks. We cannot continue to say it is too hard to do anything about it.”
Collins, flanked by health spokesman Shane Reti, justice spokesman Simon Bridges, Tukituki MP Lawrence Yule and Napier candidate Katie Nimon, said Labour had “very quietly” rescinded National’s 2017 plan to deal with meth when it came into office, and what it had created was a “piecemeal approach”.
“This is a drug that affects every strata of society. Every profession, every trade, every job has this in it. It is not solely people involved in the transport industry or journalism or politics or anything like that. It is right through society.”
Bridges said there must also be a strong response from law and order agencies to disrupt meth imports: “We will build capacity to interdict the international crime cartels that are bringing this problem to our shores. Good intelligence and international co-operation will be a priority ...”
National’s plan would also increase police and health funding to identify new drugs and bad batches sooner, introduce more drug dogs at airports and ports, aiming to reduce meth use in Corrections facilities.
It would also target domestic organised-crime networks with extra focus and resourcing from police.
—Hawke’s Bay Today
