ROAD TOLL DROPS MORE THAN 16 DURING LOCKDOWN
The novel coronavirus has shown its silver lining: One Kiwi has died from the virus but our stay-at- home rules have saved roughly 16 lives on New Zealand's now all but abandoned roads.
New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) data from Friday shows that traffic counts are now about one-fifth of what they would normally be across our main centres, while Ministry of Transport figures show that 88 people have died on New Zealand roads so far this year. By the same time in 2019, 112 had died. The average deaths by now, from the last four years combined, was about 104 - more than 16 higher than we now are.
Prior to the coronavirus reaching New Zealand, 2020's road toll was looking slightly better than last year but not as good as in some previous years.
With the long-weekend Easter break about to begin and New Zealanders effectively unable to travel, the pattern is likely to continue.
It was a pattern forecast by road safety campaigner Clive Matthew- Wilson, who on March 22 predicted a drop in the toll.
This was when New Zealand was at alert level two, there were 66 known coronavirus cases in the country, and non-essential travel around the country was merely limited.
Yesterday Matthew-Wilson said the Covid-19 pandemic had been a terrible tragedy, "so it's good that there has been at least one positive side effect".
It was inevitable that the toll would once again rise when restrictions were lifted, but it was still likely that this year's toll would be lower than last year's.
"Last year, people were optimistic and had jobs. This year, we face an uncertain future with a sharp rise in unemployment. Historically, recessions almost always mean a lower road toll.
"The overall road toll has been dropping since the late 1980s, mainly thanks to safer cars, safer roads and better medical attention.
"The highs and lows have largely followed the economy."
NZTA figures show the amount of traffic on the roads was down by about 80 per cent. Wellington had the biggest drop, of 81.7 per cent, while Hamilton had the smallest decrease at 74.3 per cent. Auckland's drop was 75.9 per cent.
"Our advice for the Easter weekend is basically to support the message . . . that everyone should stay at home and enjoy the long weekend within their bubbles," an NZTA spokesman said.
