$8M EVENT FUND MAY BE REROUTED
Wellington City Council wants to freeze $8 million for events spending over the next 12 months despite predictions public gatherings will continue to be banned for over a year.
The council is proposing to set aside the money in a city recovery fund aimed at marketing campaigns and delivering a "strong programme of early events" once the coronavirus lockdown ends.
But the proposal looks likely to be scuttled by councillors who want the money redirected to more immediate concerns such as supporting affected businesses and workers.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said recently the Covid-19 disease would need to be managed in New Zealand until a vaccine was found, and that could be well over a year away.
Even a drop to level one under the coronavirus alert system would involve border restrictions, stringent self-isolation, physical distancing measures, and a ban on gatherings of more than 500 people.
City councillor Tamatha Paul said the $8m fund needed to be adjusted to provide targeted support for industries and businesses affected by the lockdown measures.
"We know there aren't going to be any events in Wellington for a while, so there's no point setting money aside for events that might not even end up happening."
Paul plans to move an amendment at today's council meeting to see the money redirected towards environmental and technological advancement, emissions and waste reduction, and Kaupapa Maori innovation.
She believed she had the necessary support among councillors.
Wellington Urban Consulting director of corporate affairs Chamanthie Sinhalage- Fonseka said measures to combat coronavirus prohibited congregation at the highest levels, and highly discouraged it at the lowest levels. That meant events would most likely be discouraged for 18 months.
"The message has been quite clear that pending a vaccine, we will be bouncing between levels four and one. At level one, events of the kind and frequency that draw crowds will still not be allowed.
"Experts are predicting it will be three to four years before tourism is back on its feet."
People were also likely to continue precautions such as staying home as New Zealand moved to the lower levels of the alert system, she said.
"This means in the immediate aftermath of level four - or within the next 12 months - events and destination marketing is unlikely to be overly successful in stimulating the economy.
"To wait for an opportunity to run events is to hold onto the $8m and do nothing for 12 to 18 months while people are losing jobs and looking down the barrel of shutting businesses."
Wellington mayor Andy Foster said the city could still enjoy domestic events even if border restrictions remained in place.
"My view is our best bet is to absolutely eradicate the disease as quickly as possible so then we can at least get our domestic economy working properly."
The funding would come from unspent money in 2019-20 as well as from the 2020-21 events budget, he said.
