Home learning packs for school children on the way
Thousands of free computers and modems heading out to families
Home learning packs and devices to enable remote learning will soon start landing at the doors of thousands of Kiwi families next week to support children stuck at home during the coronavirus lockdown.
The Ministry of Education has confirmed the first of 2000 modems began being sent out this week, with hard packs being sent from today.
Devices will start to be sent out next week.
They are being provided to families with school-aged children who don’t have suitable learning devices or internet at home.
Two new educational TV channels, in English and Māori, are also being pulled together in record time to launch on Wednesday when the new school term starts — remotely, with both teachers and students teaching and studying in their homes.
Much-loved children’s television presenter Suzy Cato, who will front science, maths and other content on the English-language channel, said the whole lineup had only been finalised in the past week.
“Nothing like this has ever been done before,” she said.
Others tapped for the English-language channel, which will screen free on TVNZ+2 and on Sky channel 502, include Lotto presenter Jordan Vandermade, neuroscientist Nathan Wallis and early childhood teacher Karen O’Leary, better known for her role in TV’s Wellington Paranormal.
The channels will screen from 9am to 3pm daily with programmes for the full age range from preschoolers to senior high school.
The Māori content will be on Māori Television’s Te Reo channel on Freeview and on Sky’s channel 82.
Education Minister Chris Hipkins said the Government had approved emergency funding for the package of $87.7 million, and “further additional funding might be required”.
Schools have said 80,000 families, with about a sixth of the country’s 1.1 million children and young people under age 18, lack either suitable learning devices or Wi-Fi at home.
Many schools have lent out computers to families for the lockdown, and Hipkins said the Government has ordered 17,000 more laptops and Chromebooks, due to arrive this month.
“We are working to secure thousands more devices from offshore.”
The devices will be owned by schools, and each school will decide whether to bring them back into the school or leave them with needy families when the lockdown ends.
They will be set up with software to block inappropriate content, and will be insured by the ministry.
It will take longer to install broadband links for all homes that don’t have them, because of a worldwide shortage of modems driven by school closures which now affect 91 per cent of the world’s schoolchildren.
“As supplies become available, we expect to ramp up to sending out thousands of modems each week.
“We believe there are about 350 students where there is currently no internet potential of any kind.
“We are exploring the possibility of satellite coverage for these households.”
Priority for devices and internet will be given to families with children studying for NCEA in Years 11 to 13.
In the meantime, the ministry is also dispatching 20,000 hard-copy learning packs this week and 40,000 next week, and Hipkins said up to 500,000 could be dispatched in total if schools remain closed.
Packs for primary kids include school readers, workbooks, the School Journal, fold-out cards and guidance for parents.
Preschoolers will get large boxes including story books, felt-tip pens, crayons, chalk, a glue stick and other materials such as fabric, coloured cardboard and jigsaw puzzles.
All materials are also on the Learning from Home website.
The ministry says the huge outlay does not necessarily signal schools will stay shut beyond April 22.
