NICE JOB NZ, WE'VE HELD THE APOCALYPSE AT BAY
Ididn't really sleep much during the first few days of lockdown. In a constant state of always being a bit tired but never sleepy, I instead spent hours binge-watching Doomsday Preppers. The remarkable reality show follows Americans who spend all their time and money preparing for the apocalypse.
It's fair to say I was looking for tips. In what felt like the blink of an eye, coronavirus had evolved from a distant oddity we needn't be worried about to an all-consuming nightmare. As the supermarket lines and uncertainty grew, I worried the preppers might be right. My sleep-deprived mind imagined them taunting, "Who's laughing now?"
Each family has its own unique survival plan and fears on Doomsday Preppers. Sometimes they opt to maintain gardens for sustenance, other times they stockpile vast quantities of food and fuel. In the end, however, they all share one common trait. They all carry weapons because these preppers believe humanity will turn on itself.
We humans are massive pessimists, obsessed with self-sabotage. We plan to pull up drawbridges, build walls and prepare for looting when times become tough. Our automatic response is "but he did it first".
It's not just an American thing. Our army was put on standby in case people didn't comply with the lockdown order. People queued outside Auckland gun stores in the days before lockdown. Of course the troops, the stacks of water bottles and the amateur armouries have not been required.
Sure, some people are bending the meaning of "lockdown". But those rule flouters aren't out to cause havoc. Like Health Minister David Clark, the rule-breakers seem more misguided and confused than dangerous and callous.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern says people are sometimes "idiots". Idiots are not the villains we prepared for. In fact, when it comes down to it, there are few villains at all. At a time when anarchy was meant to loom large and every man was expected to be battling for themselves, New Zealand has seen the very opposite.
Sadly, many other countries and governments have not done what is required to beat Covid-19. A prioritisation of profit over people, seen most brazenly in the coronaavirus hotbed that is the US, has cost thousands of lives.
World leaders hesitated from pushing businesses to close, choosing instead to close their eyes and wish for the best. We did the opposite.
Instead of thinking about the most vulnerable and working to help them, some have maintained the philosophy of individualism. The World Health Organisation has repeatedly warned that hoarding of personal protective gear is costing lives.
US President Donald Trump earlier talked about lifting isolation guidelines "before Easter", just as his country became the new epicentre of a global pandemic that shows no sign of waning.
There's no medical reason to lift isolation rules. He justifies it by saying, "the cure cannot be worse than the problem itself". But a cure that could save hundreds of thousands of lives - with 400,000 now infected in the US - is surely worth missing a holiday for.
Other countries have also approached this crisis with a "she'll be right" attitude, but surprisingly - I guess - not us.
Ican certainly see the appeal of wishing away the virus. I often wonder what the harm would be in going for a swim. But that's the same attitude that sees bars stay open and beaches fill up. If we all grant ourselves special exceptions, then no-one's following the rules.
For some, following the rules comes at extra cost. Business that relies on face-to-face contact is simply a no go. The lockdown has brought forward the reality of the new economy. Hotels and airlines, sites of entertainment and tourism, won't be the same while the threat of Covid-19 looms over the world. A terrifying number of jobs have already been lost.
The Ministry for Social Development processed 100,000 wage subsidy applications in a single day. Many of us will be feeling crunch times approaching, if they haven't hit already, and are looking for some turnabout in the future. While I can't tell you when that point will be, we all know a slightly new normality is in the not too distant future.
We'll get there not by turning on each other and taking everything we can get our hands on. It turns out the doomsday experts were wrong. Our remarkable feat controlling Covid-19 is thanks to compassion and selfless attitudes. We know that even though times are bad and jobs are disappearing, we can stick it out together in isolation. We are making things better.
Keep proving the preppers wrong, and I'll see you on (hopefully) the first day out of lockdown.
