SLOW THAW FOR OLDER INVESTORS
Investor confidence is yet to return to pre-pandemic levels, with older investors feeling disappointed with low interest rates on term deposits.
ASB's Investor Confidence Survey showed investor confidence moving into positive territory, putting behind it the lows of the national Covid-19 lockdown in May and April.
But confidence was not evenly spread with Aucklanders significantly less optimistic about the future performance of their investments.
"It's great to see confidence recovering, which is understandable given things are going so much better than we expected only six months ago," said ASB senior economist Chris Tennent- Brown.
The survey showed that across the country marginally more investors expected returns on their investments in KiwiSaver, shares and properties, to improve in the coming year, than expected them to worsen.
Net investor confidence, which the difference between those who think investment returns would improve versus those who thought they would worsen in the coming year, had lifted from -11 per cent in the third quarter to +2 per cent for the three months to December, Tennent-Brown said.
Confidence had hit its absolute low point of net -25 per cent in the second quarter covering April, May and June, he said.
In Auckland, the net score was -7 per cent, he said.
"Financial markets are performing well, and that's having a positive impact on investments like KiwiSaver and managed funds, as well as direct investments in the sharemarket," Tennent-Brown said. "However, this is being tempered by concerns about low interest rates, the high valuation of property and shares, and uncertainty around Covid-19."
A quarter of investors surveyed said the family home was providing the best return on investment. Views of rental property providing the best return remained flat for the third consecutive quarter, which Tennent- Brown said reflected the significant changes impacting landlords.
"This goes back to the loan to value restrictions which were implemented in 2013, as well as several changes introduced by both the National and Labour-led Governments," he said. Confidence in housing was split by region, with 27 per cent of those outside of Auckland viewing the family home as the best investment, compared with 21 per cent of those in Auckland.
People under the age of 30 were the most optimistic for investment returns, ASB found.
Confidence was lower among those over 60-years-old. "Generally those over 60 tend to have more income-focused investments, including term deposits, whereas the majority of under 30s are invested in KiwiSaver funds are likely to be the significant investment asset, and their own home if they have managed to get on the property ladder," Tennent- Brown said.
"It's understandable they're feeling confident given that KiwiSaver balances have recovered to pre-Covid levels, as well as the current strength of the property market and benefits of low borrowing costs."
But, he said: "There is still a way to go for a full recovery in confidence, but it is good to see another quarter of significant improvement.
"As the long-term picture becomes clearer, we should see confidence for many investments continue to lift.
"However, offsetting forces include housing affordability, low interest rates impacting savers, and the continued impact of Covid-19, despite the hopes pinned on the roll-out of vaccines this year."
