EXPERT WARNS MASK DEFICIT COULD GET HAIRY
Dentists could be competing with beauticians and hairdressers for surgical masks under level 2, as an expert warns of only three weeks' supply.
Dentists were struggling to get access to surgical masks before the country moved into the Covid-19 lockdown, New Zealand Dental Association president Dr Katie Ayers said.
Now supplies are running low and a surge in demand from other sectors who need the masks to operate safely under level 2, such as hairdressers and beauticians, could cause issues.
"Before level 3 and 4 we were having trouble accessing masks - even the normal masks that dentists wear.
"Now there is only three weeks' supply.
"It means they [dentists] won't be able to get back to work.
"We have got people with a toothache who want to get access to care."
Cabinet will decide on Monday when the country moves out of level 3, which could be as early as Wednesday.
Dentists are waiting for guidelines on how they will operate under level 2 but expect to return to routine dental care while wearing regular surgical masks, gowns and gloves.
Ayers said there were only two supply companies in New Zealand still selling the masks.
And dentists won't be able to book appointments until they have guidelines from the Ministry of Health.
Under alert level 3, dentist have been able to perform urgent medical care, while using full personal protective equipment including an N95 mask, gloves, eye protection and a long-sleeve impervious gown.
The full set costs between $80 and $150 per patient, a cost patients have had to shoulder where dentists have not been able to get the gear through their district health board.
Ayers said it was not fair to expect patients to pay this but dental practices could not sustain the costs.
"The public is being told this isn't an issue, but it is a major issue for us."
Dentists sourcing their own gear have also had issues with counterfeit respirator masks from China.
"There have been some that arrived that haven't been up to standard," she said.
Dentists have also forked out to keep their surgeries safe.
This includes modifications to waiting rooms, pressure rooms, hand sanitiser, Perspex screens for receptionists and extra staffing costs, she said.
Director-general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield has said the ministry was looking again at whether it would recommend the public wear masks during level 2.
The Ministry of Health has been approached for comment.
