How lockdown was pieced together
As coronavirus pandemic concerns grew, officials sent thousands of pages of advice to ministers to help shape their response to the unfolding crisis. The advice led
to decisions which saw billions being invested in all areas of the economy. The policy advice was released yesterday. Here is a selection from the material.
Wage subsidy warningThe Government removed the need for companies to prove they had suffered a drop in revenue to obtain the wage subsidy, despite warnings this would lead those that could survive without it to take it anyway.
As the country moved towards lockdown, Treasury officials warned that the initial scheme was not designed for such widespread disruption to the economy.
Any hurdles could encourage companies to keep operating, which might hinder attempts to control the spread of the virus. As a result, the Government was urged to broaden the scheme to include even industries deemed essential.
“There is a public health objective reinforced by maintaining broad eligibility to the wage subsidy. There is a risk firms not covered by the subsidy would not provide special leave to workers who are required to self-isolate and can’t work from home. This could create an incentive for essential service workers to go to work.”
Treasury advised that the “30 per cent income-loss eligibility test” be removed to ensure broad take-up, though it acknowledged this would mean companies which could afford not to take the subsidy would do so.
Now businesses can simply say they anticipate revenue will drop in the coming month to access the subsidy.
“It is difficult to attempt to design and implement a test that filters needy businesses from ones that may be able to absorb the lockdown,” Treasury warned.
“Retaining a more objective eligibility test may discourage employers from taking the subsidy when they do not need it.”
StrandedAs Covid-19 closed borders and flight routes at least 11,000 Kiwis were in countries assessed as high or moderate risk — with little chance of getting home.
Other New Zealanders with a way back but unable to pay for an airline ticket received loans, and officials also mulled asking banks to help out with credit-card limits. Taxpayer spending on repatriation flights alone is expected to be about $10-14 million.
“The demand for repatriation will likely continue for some time. Despite clear Government advice over the last several weeks not to travel from New Zealand and to return home if they are able to, there are stranded New Zealanders all over the world. Many are located in comparatively low-risk countries but a number are in moderate- or high-risk countries with no commercial airline options,” the briefing states.
All New Zealanders would not be able to be brought home, the briefing notes, and organising charter flights in “low risk” countries undermined airlines’ efforts to maintain commercial routes.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Mfat) had already spent more than $2.2m on repatriation flights by mid-April, and estimated the total direct cost for more repatriation flights from “high risk“countries to be as much as $8m. That would bring total spending on repatriation flights into the range of $10-14m, which could be absorbed because of savings from a reduction in other foreign affairs spending due to Covid-19.
Learning at homeThe number of laptops and modems available in New Zealand for students doing distance learning was “significantly less” than what was needed, Minister of Education Chris Hipkins was warned at the start of April.
Cabinet documents show the struggle and costs involved in trying to quickly roll out distance learning nationwide as schools closed for the lockdown period. The papers show Cabinet agreed to a $36.4m funding for distance learning on March 23, and just two weeks later Hipkins sought a further $51.34m from Cabinet.
About 82,000 families with students were thought to lack internet connectivity. A report to Hipkins said the ministry thought it could get just over 2000 of them connected before the school term started on April 15, with work to ramp up further in coming weeks.
There were 145,000 students thought to need devices or connections before online school started up. But with too few modems and laptops available — and a worldwide scramble to provide them to students as schools closed across the globe — the Ministry of Education warned it would have to ration the devices, sending them out in “tranches over time” to ensure the most disadvantaged got them first.
There were thought to be about 7000 devices available within New Zealand, according to an early April briefing. These would be “supplemented with offshore supply”, with the first shipment to arrive four weeks later.
Struggling studentsAfter the first week of the lockdown, Ministry of Education officials warned the Government some tertiary students were dropping out and going on the unemployment benefit because of the higher payments.
The officials said that because of Covid-19, many students had lost part-time jobs supplementing student loans or allowances and were struggling financially.
The advice is in a paper to Hipkins on April 2 and formed the basis of the student support package later announced.
It said students were also facing unexpected costs — such as extra internet and power bills from studying at home — and many who had jobs would not benefit from the wage subsidies because of the contracts they were on.
They warned that some of those students might never return to tertiary education. They recommended a boost to student support — through the course costs-related entitlements — as a short-term fix to close the gap between student support and the benefit.
It recommended an increase of $500 to $1500 in course costs entitlements, and the Government agreed on $1000 — estimated to cost $36m.
Liquor shopsThe Government rejected advice to deem liquor shops an essential service.
Cabinet was advised liquor shops could operate in a similar manner to supermarkets and if they were shut it could have implications for people with addiction issues where alcohol couldn’t be bought at supermarkets.
Police were concerned shutting them could also lead to stockpiling and a run on liquor stores for the two days New Zealand was at level 3 before going into lockdown.
“Another risk is that closing liquor outlets may lead to people doing ‘booze runs’, where they travel beyond their communities to get alcohol. This will impact our ability to contain transmission,” advice to Cabinet on March 24 said.
There was a concern allowing booze shops to stay open during lockdown would create perceptions “of unequal treatment between retail stores” but that could have been managed by “communicating the need to avoid causing undue harm to people with addiction issues”.
But Cabinet ultimately deemed liquor stores non-essential, except for areas where alcohol couldn’t be bought in supermarkets.
Online riskJustice officials feared children would be increasingly subjected to internet predators during lockdown, as a result of spending more time online.
Documents from the Joint Venture on Family Violence and Sexual Violence (JV) say “additional risks” also included young people accessing or viewing inappropriate content such as online pornography. Data from Pornhub shows a massive spike in traffic the day New Zealand went into lockdown.
And the officials were worried about children being particularly vulnerable to under-reported abuse, and to witnessing violence at home, as abusive behaviours escalated in isolation.
To combat this, the Government put an extra focus on prevention and early intervention, including messages about promoting the right behaviours and supporting people to ask for help as well as for people to provide help. However, it still expected family and sexual violence to rise, including as lockdown restrictions eased — but that it would go unreported for a time.
It was particularly concerned about the under-reporting of child abuse, about abuse of older people, and how withdrawal from alcohol and other drugs could lead to an escalation in family and sexual violence. “There is an increased probability that children and young people will take additional risks when online for longer periods at home, like accessing or viewing inappropriate content such as online pornography,” it said.
