Destiny leader and wife ‘in good health’
Destiny Church leader Brian Tamaki and his wife say they have not tested positive for Covid-19 after a fellow church member did so.
Papatoetoe resident Paul Thompson, who was charged last week over an anti-lockdown event in Auckland, has tested positive for Covid, Stuff reported yesterday.
Thompson, 57, last week denied failing to comply with the Covid-19 Public Health Response Order by attending the big gathering during alert level 3 restrictions.
Following reports of Thompson’s positive result, Tamaki said he and his family are in “good health”.
“Thank you for asking about my health, which usually I would treat as a private matter. But, neither Hannah or I, or those in our bubble, have Covid-19,” Tamaki said.
“We remain focused on taking sensible steps to limit this possibility.”
Tamaki said it was not his place to comment on a church member’s health but said he had no “direct knowledge” of Thompson’s status.
“The church has been prevented from offering any live services through the level 4, and the current level 3, lockdowns so I have had little to do with Paul and his family.
“If he does have any health issue, I wish him and his family well and all the support they require,” he said.
About 5000 people gathered at Auckland Domain on Saturday, October 30, then marched through the streets of Newmarket brandishing freedom signs and flags and blocking traffic.
Police said they were “disappointed” in the actions of the organisers of the event, who “went ahead despite police warning them that the gathering was a breach of the current restrictions”.
Thompson was also charged alongside Tamaki with organising another protest at Auckland Domain on October 2.
Thompson told Stuff he had a negative Covid test on the Friday before October 30 protest.
Destiny Church said on Sunday, in a statement to the Herald , that it was “not aware of any such case”.
“We have also not been notified by the Ministry of Health of any member within Destiny Church having contracted Covid-19 to date.
“Should we ever receive such a notification it is our policy not to comment to the media as it would be a breach of privacy for us to disclose members’ personal information ... as Destiny Church has not held any church services for three months, it is highly unlikely we will be contacted. Therefore it would not be relevant or in the public’s interest for the church to be mentioned as we cannot be a location of interest.”
