NEW COVID WOES INCREASE PRESSURE ON GOVERNMENT OVER ROLL-OUT
The Government is bracing for a torrid few weeks ahead as Covid cases rise, after Northland was plunged into a level 3 lockdown overnight and experts warned that the R value of the virus - the number of people being infected by each case - was rising above 1.
In a hastily scheduled media conference yesterday evening, Minister for Covid-19 Response Chris Hipkins revealed that a woman who travelled to Northland using falsified papers had moved widely across the region before testing positive to Covid-19. The woman was not co-operating with police, he said.
"We believe this new information warrants an alert-level change decision to keep Northland people safe," he said.
After nearly eight weeks in lockdown, the Government will decide on Monday whether Auckland will get more freedoms and move to step 2 in the new framework unveiled by Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern on Monday. The Government is also expected to unveil further decisions around what New Zealand's post- alert level world will look like.
Stuff reported yesterday that officials were considering a traffic light system, although it is not Government policy.
As the week came to a close, positive case numbers continued to bubble away, with 44 new cases of Covid-19 in the community reported yesterday - 41 in Auckland and three in Waikato.
"We acknowledge today's numbers are higher than recent days. This is not unexpected because there have been a number of contacts of new cases, and we can expect to get fluctuations from day to day," director of public health Dr Caroline McElnay said.
The increases here came as the state of Victoria, with a population of 6.6 million, reported more than 1800 cases in 24 hours, a national record in Australia. The state thought it had eliminated the virus in early June and was recording single-digit daily case numbers as recently as August 6, only 11 days before New Zealand's lockdown.
The Government is now full- steam ahead on trying to roll out its vaccine campaign with 82,000 vaccines being delivered in the 24 hours to 1pm yesterday. Ardern has been on a North Island tour through Waikato, into Hastings and up to Ruatoria, north of Gisborne, for a Bunnings Warehouse Heartland Championship rugby match today.
"We need to make sure that every corner of New Zealand is protected, and the best protection we can provide is the vaccine," Ardern said in Hastings yesterday.
Following weeks of criticism for its slow vaccine rollout among Maori communities, the Government yesterday chalked up the biggest day of Maori vaccinations since the rollout began, with more than 10,000 jabs, 4000 of which were first doses.
"There is now real momentum in the Maori vaccination campaign. Right across the country, Maori are rolling up their sleeves to get vaccinated to protect their whanau and community," Associate Health Minister Peeni Henare said.
Vaccination rates among older Maori are strong, with 91 per cent of over 65s having had their first dose and 81 per cent fully vaccinated. But there have been questions raises about the slow uptake among younger Maori.
"We're also seeing big increases in Tamaki Makaurau, with 65.3 per cent of Maori having had their first dose. That's up from 52.8 per cent three weeks ago."
But the spread of the virus south into Waikato has meant restrictions look likely to stay in that region for time being.
And now it appears that the reproduction rate of the virus could be increasing.
Professor Michael Plank, of the University of Canterbury's school of mathematics and statistics and a principal investigator at Te Punaha Matatini told Stuff that even a small uptick in the R rate could mean a surge in cases.
"Small changes now can have really big effects in the number of cases in two or three weeks' time," he said.
Plank said that a crucial factor was getting the vaccination rate higher but that "we certainly need to keep a close eye on it because there's a fairly narrow margin for error here".
And as the Government is looking at further expanding various vaccine mandates and introducing a vaccine certificate, which was announced on Monday, it has found support for such measure from the opposition.
"The critical point I make is that we're going to have to provide the ability for greater freedoms for people who are a vaccinated as compared to people who are unvaccinated," National Covid-19 response spokesman Chris Bishop said yesterday. "There has to be a reward for people who are vaccinated compared to unvaccinated.
"And so it may be that we allow people who are vaccinated to travel more outside their particular boundaries. For example, it may be that you can gather with more people."
