CALL FOR FOOD FESTIVAL FUNDING TO BE REVEALED
Six city councillors have called for ratepayer contributions towards this year's Wellington on a Plate festival to be made public, saying people have a right to know how much they are paying to support the event.
The month-long festival was postponed mid-course on August 18 as the country entered a Covid- 19 lockdown, but resumed from yesterday under alert level 2 restrictions.
The festival is run by private organisation the Wellington Culinary Events Trust and is supported by ratepayers via contributions from the city council and WellingtonNZ.
Economic development agency WellingtonNZ receives most of its funding through grants from the city council and the Greater Wellington Regional Council.
City councillor Diane Calvert said before the lockdown she planned to ask council staff for details on all ratepayer contributions to events in the city during the past year, including Wellington on a Plate.
"Unless it's commercially sensitive, I don't see any reason why contributions by ratepayers should not be disclosed."
Calvert said this week she stood by her comments.
Her 13 fellow councillors were asked pre-lockdown if they agreed with her position, and seven of the eight who responded - Iona Pannett, Fleur Fitzsimons, Jill Day, Nicola Young, Rebecca Matthews, Laurie Foon, and Simon Woolf - said they did. Sean Rush said it depended on whether the information was commercially sensitive. Foon and Young yesterday changed their position and agreed with Rush.
Calvert said she would ask for the figures to be disclosed in a pending council report.
Asked whether he agreed the funding should be made public, Wellington Mayor Andy Foster said he supported money being spent to help struggling businesses and promote key events for the city. He also revealed the council had provided a top-up subsidy of $150,000 for this year's event - above the annual funding provided to WellingtonNZ to support events.
Yesterday, he said it was now even more important for the city to support its businesses following the latest disruptions.
WellingtonNZ events and experiences general manager Warrick Dent said it was "comfortable that Visa Wellington On a Plate provides a good level of return on the investment made".
