NO EXTRA CREDITS FOR students who miss 40 days of school
Students at Hutt Valley High School could be ineligible for extra NCEA credits, despite being unable to access their school for more than 40 days this year.
Students have been told they will get extra credits if their schools are closed for 20 or more school days due to a Covid-19 lockdown.
Hutt Valley High School students were unable to attend school during lockdown for 16 teaching days. But that comes on top of the 24 to 25 days at school year 12 and 13 students missed due to toxic mould in the school's Block C.
"Forty-one days trumps any school in the country at the moment, and at present, we might get nothing for our students," deputy principal Nick Larkin said. "Whether it's Covid or mould shouldn't matter, it's just not fair and the students are stuck in the middle and get penalised."
Students working towards NCEA level 1 could earn up to 10 extra credits, known as Learning Recognition Credits, while those at levels 2 or 3 would be eligible for up to eight.
Larkin said he had contacted NZQA earlier in the year asking for students to be considered for extra credits due to the mould closure but had been unsuccessful.
"Learning Recognition Credits are ring-fenced for Covid, but we thought some action and creativity could have been shown for Hutt Valley High School," Larkin said.
Steph van den Bergh, a parent at the school, said the mould closures and lockdowns had been stressful and disruptive for students.
"From a parent's point of view, [the mould closure] was exactly the same process as lockdown. There was the same frustration and the same anxiety levels," she said.
Students had struggled with getting answers to questions and lacking face- to-face time with teachers. During the mould closure, teachers continued with year 9, 10 and 11 classes on site while senior students worked from home, which was an added difficulty.
Hutt Valley High School was forced to close its Block C permanently after toxic black mould was found in March this year. A total of 13 classrooms, three bathrooms and a dance studio were deemed unsafe.
