Resilience during a pandemic
No one wanted Covid 19 or its flashy sister Delta. But we got them anyway. No one wants to be in lockdown level 4, but that’s what we have to do in Auckland. No one wants to snuffle under a mask but that’s what we have to do to help save lives.
So when people say the Government could have done something sooner or better or smarter, it is time to remember that we are all finding our way through this catastrophe. The Government is working with the best advice it can get.
Hundreds of people are out in the community doing their best work to test and vaccinate a population that seems to be riddled with whingers and naysayers.
Take a breath, be grateful we have what we have got. Get over the misery of having to make changes to our lives.
Think how we can support one another and, although this is now often said in a sarcastic tone, the best thing we can do is to be kind.
Rae McGregor, Mt Eden.
Quality cover
It is obvious that we are going to be reliant on quality masks.
There needs to be a gold standard that fits well and doesn’t ride up or down. People will wear them if they fit and are comfortable.
The bog standard surgical mask doesn’t cut the mustard and we need a decent mask so masks are not the weakest link.
The N95 surgical mask is one of the best and is a small price to pay.
Dave Miller, Matua.
Constant exposure
Does the future look like this? Constantly expose Aucklanders to Covid, and then lock down 1.5 million people for a month or more to protect the rest of the country? Because, if that’s the plan, we need to see some alternatives.
Should purpose-built MIQ facilities be set up in a remote, well-ventilated part of the country? Will a certain level of vaccination, city-wide or country-wide, end the need for level 4 lockdowns?
None of these ideas is new, but we need to see some action. Covid isn’t going away. Sacrificing the livelihoods and mental health of Aucklanders to maintain a never-ending elimination strategy will eventually become unacceptable.
Philip Tetley-Jones, Pt Chevalier.
Hypothesis tested
I think we have enough evidence now that using Auckland as a petri dish for Covid has proven that dense populations facilitate the spread of Covid, and results in greater negative economic and social impacts.
Can we now explore a new hypothesis; that moving MIQ facilities to remote areas reduces the spread of disease and results in less economic and social damage to the nation, and increases resilience?
Alison Feeney, Remuera.
Through traffic
Allowing Northlanders uncontrolled access to drive through Auckland to the Waikato and beyond is extremely naive.
Operating a system of trust, without evidence, is asking for trouble.
As we have just witnessed, with the recent Middlemore Hospital debacle, accepting someone’s word at face value can be very risky.
What is to stop someone exiting the motorway and visiting whomever and continuing on their way?
Unless people are literally timed on their trip, from one border to the next, the police will have no idea what the motorist has been up to.
The same applies for people transiting through Auckland to Northland.
It only takes one breach to spread Covid-19 into another region.
Mark van Praagh, Hobsonville Pt.
Wartime governance
The gaping flaw in Charles Hadfield’s wartime simile (NZ Herald, September 6) is that, in wartime, coalition governments are formed so that the whole of Parliament is focused on defeating the enemy and the full capabilities of every member of Parliament are brought to bear on that objective.
Far from pushing the capabilities of Steven Joyce and his ilk aside, the Government should be embracing them and seeking to use their expertise.
James Ford, Stanmore Bay.
Island state
A recent article about the alarming increase of Covid cases in Australia (NZ Herald, September 7) contained an important omission. While statistics were given for each individual state, with NSW having by far the most cases, followed by Victoria, Queensland and states to the west, there was no mention of Tasmania.
Following the initial outbreak in Australia in early 2020 when passengers from the notorious cruise ship the Ruby Princess dispersed around the country, with one going to Burnie in Tasmania where infection was immediately eliminated, Tasmania closed its borders. It kept them closed.
Later there were limited cautious reopenings, but with the current catastrophic outbreak on the mainland, free entry travel is forbidden. Separated from the mainland by Bass Strait, the geographic advantages of an island are obvious.
Meanwhile, Tasmanians have been vaccinated. It has the highest double-dose vaccination rates in all Australia.
Jacqueline Walker, Parnell.
Deport options
Government ministers’ claims there were no legal options to deal with the New Lynn mall terrorist do not ring true.
ADLS Immigration Committee chairman Stewart Dalley noted on RNZ that no law change was needed for Samsudeen to be deported.
The Immigration Act already allows the deportation of anybody deemed to be a threat to national security — even if he is a refugee.
That Samsudeen was on 24/7 surveillance confirms he was viewed as a serious security risk. Minister of Immigration Kris Faafoi could have certified Samsudeen posed such a threat, and the deportation order would have been signed by the Governor General.
Deportation would have prevented serious injury to seven people, and millions spent on surveillance.
After Samsudeen’s refugee status was cancelled in February 2019, he had 28 days to appeal to the Immigration and Protection Tribunal and could not be deported until the appeal was heard — which is usually three to six months — but no action was taken since February 2019 to progress the appeal.
If the Prime Minister, Police Commissioner and others had longstanding concerns about Samsudeen, why did they not pursue the existing Immigration Act options?
Janie Weir, Newmarket.
Retained wrongs
Not that long ago, New Zealand was deporting hard-working people who were making good contributions to society and the economy because they had overstayed their visas. Yet, the Government could not deport a known, radicalised, potential killer because he came as a refugee.
There’s something wrong somewhere.
Pamela Russell, Orakei.
Fending blues
The heart-warming story of Akira Ioane’s on-field successes — one pundit scored him a perfect 10 for his latest Perth performance — we learn, was preceded by his struggle with the depths of depression.
I am sure many will join me in their admiration and support for his courage.
Larry Mitchell, Rothesay Bay .
Parkland legacy
New Zealanders are lucky to have had someone of the calibre of Lou Sanson to head the Department of Conservation for the past 10 years.
Lou followed in the footsteps of the previous, outstanding director generals of the former Department of Lands and Survey including Bing Lucas, Noel Coad and George McMillan and the Auckland Commissioner of Crown Lands Darcy O’Brien and the surveyor generals Ian Stirling and Bill Robertson.
Their wisdom, foresight and determination resulted in the permanent protection of many millions of hectares of our outstanding landscapes and rich, historic character.
It is important that the leadership qualities of the likes of Arnold Turner of the former Auckland Regional Authority are now used to rezone all golf courses, racecourses and reclamations adjoining marinas, etc, as “public open space”.
Ngāti Whātua Ōrākei could confirm its outstanding leadership qualities by setting aside coastal land at Belmont as the Oneoneroa/Belmont Regional Park.
This could be our enduring legacy for the pain of the current lockdown.
Bruce Tubb, Belmont.
