City's food delivery sector a rare outbreak success story
As the pandemic keeps people out of restaurants, many have found a lifeline by becoming partners with firms like Deliveroo and Foodpanda
Social distancing and stay-at-home measures aimed at curbing the spread of the coronavirus outbreak in Hong Kong have boosted the food delivery market, with luxury hotels and a ­top-notch cake shop joining the game.
The three main delivery platforms, Deliveroo, Foodpanda and Uber Eats, have seen orders rise, with more food outlets signing up, too.
Deliveroo has also invested more than HK$10 million in a common kitchen hub in Quarry Bay, where restaurants cook takeaway meals. The company's general manager in Hong Kong, Brian Lo Ka-chung, said orders had doubled in the first three months of the year as the Covid-19 crisis hit, compared with the quarter before.
Between January and late March, 1,500 businesses joined the platform, raising the total number of restaurant partners to about 6,500 - nearly 40 per cent of the city's licensed restaurants and factory canteens.
"Many restaurants used to be reluctant to join or concerned that their branding would be affected," Lo said. "But for survival's sake, they are now trying food delivery."
Among the city's measures to slow the spread of the virus, restaurants have been told to run at half capacity for dine-in services, with gatherings of no more than four people until April 23.
The restrictions have heaped misery on businesses already reeling from the tourism slump and work-from-home policies at offices.
Food delivery is providing a lifeline to stricken businesses.
Even luxury hotels the Mandarin Oriental in Central and the Royal Garden in Tsim Sha Tsui have introduced delivery services.
General manager Pierre Barthes said: "The Covid-19 virus is spreading globally and is clearly having an impact on all industries, and Mandarin Oriental, Hong Kong is certainly not immune to this."
For the first time, the upscale Cova Ristorante & Caffe will send cakes priced above HK$398 to customers at home, with no delivery charge.
Lo from Deliveroo was unconcerned about intensifying competition, saying it was important that restaurants that previously did not do deliveries were now willing to try.
"Today they might do it themselves," Lo said. "But the next step is, if they can't handle the orders, they'll come to our platform."
Uber Eats, with 2,500 restaurant partners, also sees the trend of more restaurants offering discounted takeaway services as an opportunity.
"Businesses are trying to provide Hong Kong people with another way to enjoy food and doing what they need to do to survive," said Richard Willder, Uber's public policy chief in Hong Kong. "We'd be very interested in working with these restaurants and hotels to offer our technology."
Foodpanda, with more than 7,000 restaurant partners, said enquiries for collaboration had quadrupled recently. "Instead of viewing these hotels and eateries as competitors, we see this as a chance to cooperate with them," Hong Kong CEO Arun Makhija said.
But Jennifer Chu, head of operations at Pololi, which sells Hawaiian-inspired food, noted competition among restaurants was heating up as more rushed to partner with the delivery platforms. This prompted her firm, with five branches in the city, to offer 20 per cent discounts across its menu for home deliveries.
"Price is an important factor now. When I can get a meal from a cha chaan teng at HK$40 to ­HK$50, I may not buy a sashimi bowl at HK$90," Chu said.
Pololi's sales plunged by 30 to 40 per cent in February and March compared with January, she said, and the recent increase in delivery orders might not make up for the earlier losses.
Christian Mongendre, founder of vegetarian restaurant Treehouse, said his revenues had slumped by up to half compared to before the health crisis, and that delivery and takeaway sales were helping in the short term. "This is giving us a lifeline to survive at the moment," he said.
Amanda Fong, 23, who works in finance, said she began ordering five meals a week from Deliveroo after her company introduced working from home a month ago.
"It is convenient because if I'm busy with work, I don't need to leave the house or cook," Fong said.
But soon she found her food bill shooting up, as she used to have subsidised dinners at work. Before she started working from home, she spent about HK$800 to HK$1,000 a week on meals, but that doubled when she started ordering from Deliveroo.
"So now I try to cook myself or get takeaways instead of deliveries," she said.
Until last month, Erin Wong, 28, who works in the communications industry, had never ordered food from any of the delivery platforms. Although she still goes to the office, she began ordering food online two or three times each week, mostly Chinese noodles, spending about HK$300.
"With the pandemic getting serious, my colleagues don't want to go out to eat. So we began ordering meals to our workplace," she said.
Meanwhile, green groups have been watching the buzz in the food delivery scene and worrying about the impact on the environment.
The group Greeners Action conducted a survey of about 2,000 people and found that Hongkongers were ordering 21.1 million takeaway meals a week, 55 per cent more than in the period before Covid-19 hit the city. Just over half the respondents said they were ordering more takeaway food than before the outbreak.
The group estimated that the amount of single-use plastic cutlery, boxes and takeaway bags increased to 101 million pieces per week this month, up more than 2.2 times from same period last year.
"A takeaway meal for a family of four will mean 26 individual pieces of plastic," said Jac Lun Ka-yu, the group's senior project officer, who encouraged people to use their own food containers for takeaways.
Hahn Chu Hon-keong, a director at Green Earth, encouraged people to share the names and locations of restaurants offering rebates to those who brought their own containers.
> Harry's View A10
Headline of the Online Version: Work from home, call for meals: food delivery platforms provide lifeline to Hong Kong's empty restaurants
