20 words & phrases that defined 2020: Delivery
The Covid-19 pandemic turned the luxury of convenience of having food and groceries delivered to one's doorstep into a necessity for many Singaporeans this year.
SINGAPORE - The Covid-19 pandemic turned the luxury of convenience of having food and groceries delivered to one's doorstep into a necessity for many Singaporeans this year.
As the coronavirus situation escalated in late March, the Government advised the public to avoid non-essential trips out of their homes and to buy food and groceries online to reduce physical interactions.
As a result, delivery slots were quickly snapped up for supermarkets like Cold Storage and Fairprice, as well as online grocery shopping services like Redmart.
Some shoppers had to wait days or even weeks for a time slot, with Redmart announcing on April 5 that it was seeing 11 times as many customers as usual.
Then came the ban on dining-in at restaurants, which was in effect from the start of the circuit breaker period on April 7 to the beginning of phase two of Singapore's reopening on June 19.
Just a week into the circuit breaker, demand for food delivery services had increased by up to 30 per cent, according to a joint statement by Enterprise Singapore, the Land Transport Authority and the Singapore Food Agency.
The surge proved to be sustained. A survey conducted by the Singapore Management University's Institute of Service Excellence between July and September found that more than three in five restaurant customers ordered more takeout or food delivery because of Covid-19.
During the circuit breaker, restaurants that were not already offering deliveries quickly scrambled to sign up with delivery platforms.
The "Big Three" players, GrabFood, Deliveroo and Foodpanda, each reported in April that they had added hundreds of new food and beverage operators. Smaller players like WhyQ and Oddle also reported several times more transactions and interest from operators than usual.
Exactly two weeks into the circuit breaker period, the Government announced that standalone shops primarily selling drinks, snacks and desserts would no longer be allowed to open, even for takeaway.
The announcement came just a day before the new rule kicked in on April 22, which led to long queues forming at bubble tea shops as Singaporeans tried to get a final taste of their favourite beverage.
But the fear that bubble tea would be indefinitely unavailable proved to be short-lived, as many enterprising chains like Milksha, Gong Cha and Koi soon tied up with eateries to offer their drinks as add-ons to meals through food delivery services.
Redmart staff prepare items for delivery in December 2020. PHOTO: LIM YAOHUI
Taxi operator ComfortDelGro announced its own delivery service on April 29, which allowed taxi drivers - blighted by a dearth of passengers - to take on food and grocery delivery jobs.
Other new entrants like Pickupp Singapore, property developer CapitaLand's Capita3Eats and reservation platform Chope also emerged to take on the Big Three food delivery players.
Several initiatives aimed at helping hawkers and restaurants bypass the commission fees charged by delivery platforms were also launched, and some business owners took matters into their own hands by coming up with their own delivery systems.
Even nightclubs like Zouk and cocktail bars like Jigger and Pony began offering bottled cocktails delivered for upwards of $30 a pop.
The pandemic also accelerated the expansion of "cloud kitchens" that prepare food specifically for delivery and do not have physical shop fronts, including several run by the Big Three.
Cabby Jade Cho helped deliver essential medical supplies to patients' doorsteps as part of a new initiative by ComfortDelGro Taxi. PHOTO: COMFORTDELGRO TAXI
Similar trends have also been seen overseas. The American fast food chain Wendy's announced this month that it plans to open 250 cloud kitchens in India, where it has just nine physical outlets.
One casualty of the explosion in demand for delivery has been Singapore's waste reduction efforts.
A survey by alumni of the National University of Singapore's Master of Science (Environmental Management) programme found that 1,334 tonnes of additional plastic waste was generated from takeaway and delivery meals during the circuit breaker period.
