'Ghost'of a chance; COVID crisis gives restaurants owner opportunity to test new business model
Before the COVID-19 lockdown, Ottawa restaurateur Nara Sok was working on bringing a new food-service business model to town. The pandemic has paralyzed other small businesses in the city, but it gave Sok's plans more urgency.
For the last year or so, Sok, who owns the pan-Asian eatery and lounge Tomo in the ByWard Market, has wanted to set up what's known as a ghost kitchen - a restaurant that doesn't serve dine-in customers or even takeout, but gets all its food to customers via delivery.
Since COVID-19 forced restaurants to shut their dining rooms in mid-March and pivot to serving only takeout or delivery, Sok thought there was no better time to divide up Tomo's kitchen and turn it into a hub for several smaller businesses that would rent space and sell their wares via Uber Eats and SkipTheDishes.
"We've always been looking into this and planning pre-COVID, but this was the gentle nudge we needed to accelerate our growth plan," Sok says.
"COVID has provided the perfect opportunity and motivation to launch this project that has the potential to revolutionize the approach to underutilized commercial kitchens."
Mandi Lunan, an Ottawa-based consultant to food businesses, says Uber Eats and other big companies own some ghost kitchens, and she is not a fan of them.
But Lunan says she is fine with locally owned ghost kitchens, which lower the barrier to access for entrepreneurs who are just starting out. For those vendors, she says, ghost kitchens are "a low-risk way to pilot a business idea before going all in, an important baby step for those who aren't sure about what to do just yet."
"Ghost kitchens are, in my opinion, the future - more so now with so many commercial restaurants being evicted," Lunan adds.
Some established restaurants look at ghost-kitchen vendors and at food trucks, she says, as unfair competition because they haven't made the same level of investment in their businesses.
That's too bad.
"There's room for all business models, in my opinion. The passion is what matters." she says.
Tomo offers its sushi, some soups, some stir-fries and other items for pickup and delivery. But within his kitchen, Sok has spun off the more focused delivery-only business Haus Bao, offering buns filled with pork belly and more through Uber Eats.
In the next few weeks, Sok will welcome in his kitchen as tenant Banh Mi Girl, the Vietnamese sandwich business that was open for a time on Dalhousie St., and Seoul Dog, a maker of Korean corn dogs, which were a hit, Sok says, at Asian Night Market events in Ottawa.
"Now that there's COVID, there's more space in the kitchen," Sok says - before the pandemic, Tomo had a 110-seat dining room to support.
Sok, who was ahead of the curve when he brought ramen to Ottawa in 2014 with his Elgin St. spot Ginza, is convinced that Ottawa's COV-ID-struck restaurant community could foster more than a few more ghost kitchens.
In particular, underused hotel kitchens could host delivery-only businesses, he says.
Sok says he has a list of vendors who are interested in selling their food items through the big delivery services, including an Ottawa pho purveyor and Skuish Cookies, which has a following 24,000 strong on Instagram. Given that level of interest, Sok says he plans to open another ghost kitchen downtown this year, and others in the suburbs in the future.
"It's just a matter of picking the right (vendors)," he says. "Once we get the space, we're good to go." phum@postmedia.com
