Outlook on the Online Food Delivery Global Market to 2028 - Featuring Delivery Hero, Uber EATS and DoorDash Among Others
(GlobeNewswire) - The "Global Online Food Delivery Market: By Type, By Distribution Channel Type, By Region - Market Outlook 2028" report has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering
According to this report, the global online takeaway food market is estimated to be valued at US$ 254 billion in the year 2028, growing at a CAGR of 10.9% in the period 2021 to 2028. Global online takeaway food market is on uptake with slew of favorable market dynamics such as growth in demand from emerging markets, higher internet penetration, increasing urbanization and rise in number of working populations.
Food retailing pattern has changed drastically over the past decade especially with the emergence of online delivery model. It provides consumers with immense choice and convenience. The online takeaway food market primarily operates on two types of business models - "Aggregators" and "New Delivery Players". The market is dominated by the traditional "Aggregators" business model.
Modern delivery options have optimized food delivery process. Food delivery market is in the midst of a dramatic channel migration with emergence of hi-tech delivery options such as Drones, Robots and Parachutes. Another trend witnessed in the industry is that of Virtual kitchens which have been manifesting inevitable rise off late as it builds digital relationship with customers virtually. These centralized off-premise kitchen models enjoys high popularity in Asia and the Middle East. Deliveroo's 'dark kitchens' is a delivery-only kitchen that exist solely in the online space without any traditional shop front.
Report Scope
This report provides detailed analysis of the global online takeaway food market from qualitative and quantitative outlooks during the forecast period across various regional markets. It also provides coverage on market dynamics with potential impact on the market during the forecast period and an in-depth analysis of the leading companies operating in the market.
Parameter Description
Base year: 2012
Forecast period: 2021 - 2028
Market sizing: Revenue in US$ Billions & CAGR for the period 2012 to 2028. Volume in Millions for the period 2012 to 2028
Country coverage: The US, Canada, Germany, The UK, France, Brazil, India & China
Vendor scope: Just Eat Takeaway, Delivery Hero SE, Uber EATS (Uber Technologies Inc.), DoorDash Inc., Deliveroo, Postmates, Zomato
Report coverage: Revenue forecast, market share analysis, company analysis, competitive landscape, market growth drivers, market restraints, market trends and company profiles
Segments Covered
The report provides revenue forecasts for global, regional and country levels. It also provides comprehensive coverage on major industry drivers, restraints, and their impact on market growth during the forecast period. For the purpose of research, the publisher has segmented global online takeaway food market report on the basis of type, delivery model, distribution channel and geography.
Market Segments - By Type, Revenue (2018 - 2028, US$ Billions)
Restaurant-to-Consumer
Platform-to-Consumer
Market Segments - By Delivery Model, Revenue (2018 - 2028E, US$ Billions)
Traditional Delivery Model
Aggregators
New Delivery Model
Market Segments - By Distribution Channel, Revenue (2018 - 2028E, US$ Billions)
Websites/Desktop
Mobile Applications
Regional Outlook, Revenue (2012 - 2028E, US$ Billions)
North America
Europe
Asia Pacific
Latin America
Regional Outlook, Volume (2012 - 2028E, Millions)
North America
Europe
Asia Pacific
Latin America
Country Outlook, Revenue (2015 - 2028E, US$ Billions)
The US
Canada
Germany
France
The UK
India
China
Brazil
Country Outlook, Volume (2015 - 2028E, Millions)
The US
Canada
Germany
France
The UK
India
China
Brazil
Vendors Outlook, Revenue (2015 - 2020, US$ Billions)
Just Eat Takeaway
Delivery Hero SE
Uber EATS (Uber Technologies Inc.)
DoorDash Inc.
Deliveroo
Postmates
Zomato
Target Audience
Food Manufacturers
Delivery Partners
End Users
Research Professionals
Consultancies
Regulatory Bodies
Key Questions Answered in the Report
Historical market size of online takeaway food market from 2012 to 2020 in US$ Billions and volume in million units.
Projected market growth in the forecasted period 2021 to 2028 with estimated revenue for each year in US$ Billions and volume in million units.
Regional and country analysis of online takeaway food market is provided for the period 2015 to 2028.
Market drivers, restraints and industry trends that has impact on revenue.
Profiling of major companies with detailed analysis of their operations in various geographies.
Online takeaway food market or food-delivery market refer to business of delivering restaurant meals to home. These platforms provide slew of options to customers to order from wide array of restaurants at their fingertips. The market has also gained significant customer traction in past couple of years. Global online takeaway food market primarily operates through two types of online platforms - "Aggregators" and "New Delivery Players". Aggregators is the traditional online takeaway food model accounting for majority of order share. New Delivery Players platform is the new entrant wherein new-delivery players build their own logistics networks, providing delivery for restaurants that do not deliver themselves.
Global online takeaway food market has overcome the slackening faced due to pandemic and has started evolving at a steady pace again. With rise in number of millennials jumping in the online food ordering bandwagon coupled with proliferation of smartphone users and internet penetration, the market is expected to witness double digit growth rate. Furthermore, other factors such as growing disposable income, increasing urbanization and rise in number of working populations are growth enablers of online takeaway food market. However, the market faces several challenges such as stringent regulatory compliance related to food industry especially in developed nations, Covid-19 outbreak, lack of loyal customers, and competition with offline food order and logistics dilemma.
The report "Global Online Food Delivery Market [By Type - Restaurant-to-Consumer & Platform-to-Consumer; By Delivery Model - Traditional Delivery Model, Aggregators & New Delivery Model; By Distribution Channel Type - Websites/Desktop & Mobile Applications; By Region- North America (The US & Canada), Europe (The UK, France & Germany), Asia Pacific (China & India) & Latin America (Brazil)] Market Outlook 2028" provides an in-depth analysis of the current scenario, detailed market outlook of the global online takeaway food market. The market is segmented by type, delivery model, and distribution channel and payment method. Future forecasts of online takeaway food delivery market overall and across various regional markets have been provided in the report till 2028. Furthermore, major industry players have been prudently analysed in the competitive landscape section of the report in order to provide key comparative insights.
Major industry players operating in the global online takeaway food market include Just Eat Takeaway, Delivery Hero SE, Uber EATS (Uber Technologies Inc.), DoorDash Inc., Deliveroo, Postmates, Zomato, among others. These players are profiled herein based on attributes such as business overview, product segments and financial analysis. It also compiles performance comparison of aforementioned companies and other leading companies in the segment based on various parameters in the competitive landscape section. In totality, the report provides detailed market analysis, with relevant forecasted data supported by key market dynamics. This information will be helpful in evaluating opportunities in global online takeaway food market.
Key Topics Covered:
1. Executive Summary
2. Research Methodology
3. Food Delivery Market
3.1 Overview
3.2 Business Models
3.3 Market Analysis
3.3.1 Market Sizing (Actual & Forecasted)
3.3.2 Market Share by Mode of Delivery
4. Online Takeaway Food
4.1 Overview
4.1.1 Evolution of Online Food Delivery
4.1.2 Types of Platform
4.1.2.1 Traditional Delivery
4.1.2.2 Aggregators
4.1.2.3 New Delivery
4.2 Food Apps
5. Online Takeaway Food Market Analysis
5.1 Market Sizing
5.1.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
5.1.2 Market Size by Volume (Actual & Forecasted)
5.1.3 Market Penetration
5.1.4 Average Revenue per User (ARPU)
5.2 Market Share Analysis
5.2.1 Market Share by Type
5.2.2 Market Share by Delivery Model
5.2.3 Market Share by Distribution Channel Type
5.2.4 Market Share by Payment Method
5.2.5 Market Share by Region
6. Market Segmentation
6.1 By Type
6.1.1 Restaurant-to-Consumer
6.1.1.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
6.1.2 Platform-to-Consumer
6.1.2.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
6.2 By Delivery Model
6.2.1 Traditional Delivery Model
6.2.1.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
6.2.2 Aggregators
6.2.2.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
6.2.3 New Delivery Model
6.2.3.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
6.3 Distribution Channel Type
6.3.1 Websites/Desktop
6.3.1.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
6.3.2 Mobile Applications
6.3.2.1 Market Size by Value (Actual & Forecasted)
7. Regional Analysis
7.1 Asia Pacific
7.2 North America
7.3 Europe
7.4 Latin America
8. Market Dynamics
8.1 Market Trends
8.1.1 Mergers & Acquisitions
8.1.2 Rising Investments
8.1.3 Innovative Delivery Channels
8.1.4 Modern Delivery options
8.1.5 Virtual Kitchens
8.2 Growth Drivers
8.2.1 Rise in Number of Smartphone Users
8.2.2 Increase in Disposable Income
8.2.3 Increasing Demand from Emerging Markets
8.2.4 Higher Internet Penetration
8.2.5 Urbanization
