Workforce shortage and other costs will likely cause restaurant prices to rise
The restaurant industry lost almost its entire workforce amid the economic hardships caused by the pandemic.
Restaurants were particularly hit hard, forced to seat customers outside and at reduced capacity. They were then asked overnight to go back to full capacity when the state reopened on June 30.
There are several implications to the loss of a workforce — rising costs being one customers will likely see, at least at restaurants that don’t have the benefit of scale to offset rising wages, said MOD Pizza CEO Scott Svenson.
“Independent (restaurants) will struggle because as wages go up, that’s going to impact their viability. The only way to offset that is going to be to raise prices,” Svenson told the Business Journal. “So I do think you’re going to see a period of time when, in order to accommodate this changing context for wages, prices are going to have to go up for independents in particular but also the larger chains to be able to survive.”
Uneeda Burger Owner and Chef Scott Staples is grappling with this very concept at his joint in Seattle’s Fremont neighborhood. He said he has only raised the price of his classic $4 burger once since it landed on the menu a decade ago (it’s now priced starting at $5.50), but that might change in the near future.
And it’s not only rising wages that are increasing prices.
“We’re not able to secure stable pricing anymore. Nobody will give us price guarantees for six months, let alone a month. I mean, it’s just all over the place. So we’re getting this warning shot across the bow on the supply chain, and they’re just kind of begging us to be ready to raise our pricing,” Staples told the Business Journal.
Other than rising costs, other trends will be a decreased menu or switching from fine-dining to more of a casual concept, like W Seattle hotel did with its restaurant Trace Market. It’s simply cost and labor efficient, said Wade Hashimoto, general manager of W Seattle.
“We had no idea the magnitude of what Covid would do to us. Many of us thought it would be a slight inconvenience,” Hashimoto said. “It changed the way we did everything.”
Restaurants and hospitality businesses around the state have been down 40% to 70% in revenue over the last year and a half, said Anthony Anton, president and CEO of the Washington Hospitality Association, in late June.
Anton, along with others in the industry, is asking customers to be understanding of the pressures around them as people come back out to dine.
“We do need a little more grace,” Anton said during a press conference. “We lost almost our entire workforce over the course of the year. We’re still short 80,000 workers, so if anyone has a friend that wants an extra job or a little extra money or is ready to return to the workforce, people are hiring.”
Did you find this article useful? Why not subscribe[https://www.bizjournals.com/seattle/subscribe?csrc=6355&ana=cstpd] to Puget Sound Business Journal (Seattle) for more articles?
