Shopping-Mall Giants Back Expanded Delivery-Only 'Ghost Kitchens' in Food Courts; Brookfield Asset Management, Simon Property invest in C3, which aims for 1,000 ghost kitchens by year-end
As the U.S. hospitality industry rebounds from pandemic closures, former hotelier Sam Nazarian is moving into the food-hall business, marrying the traditional dine-in model with delivery-only "ghost kitchens"[https://www.wsj.com/articles/latest-front-in-food-delivery-kitchens-in-empty-malls-11580644801] in hopes of solving revenue problems that have long plagued retail and food spaces.
Mr. Nazarian said his new venture, Creating Culinary Communities, which counts investors such as shopping-mall giants Brookfield Asset Management Inc. and Simon Property Group, has plans for 1,000 ghost kitchens by the end of the year. The company on Tuesday plans to announce $80 million in Series B funding co-led by Brookfield and REEF Technology, a SoftBank Group Corp. -backed operator of food-delivery kitchens and hubs for goods and services.
The move to inject new life into food courts comes as ghost kitchens gained momentum when restaurants closed and more people turned to food-delivery services[https://www.wsj.com/articles/for-food-delivery-covid-19-was-a-sugar-high-11619780401] during the Covid-19 pandemic.
With plans to lease space in Brookfield and Simon malls across the U.S., Mr. Nazarian, C3's founder and chief executive, is betting that housing dine-in and as many as 10 delivery-only kitchens in a single location—such as a mall, hotel or restaurant—will maximize profits and efficiency, he said.
"[We are] making sure these restaurants [and] food halls are operating almost at a 24-hour perspective," said Mr. Nazarian, the founder and former chief executive of SBE Entertainment Group. "You may walk into a Krispy Rice in Chicago or New York or Austin…but in the back, we have seven to 10 of our other brands being cooked there for delivery."
The company's first food hall will open in New York City at Manhattan West in September, as people return to work as summer ends. The 40,000-square-foot space will include some of C3's more than 40 brands, among them Umami Burger and Krispy Rice, a delivery-only sushi-restaurant concept.
For landlords, having a partner like C3 with hospitality expertise and ownership of multiple brands helps fuel new experiences in their premises, as well as offer their tenants room to enhance their revenues.
"We want to bring the right experiences to our properties," said Kevin McCrain, Brookfield's managing director and global head of retail. Mr. McCrain added that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to a food hall. Some could include rooftop entertainment options, and others a few full-service restaurants.
SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
Where have you found good food in a mall? Join the conversation below.
Food halls are expensive to build and operate, and require close monitoring. Brands that might struggle to draw foot traffic and sales might need to be replaced in as little as weeks, restaurant consultants said. Operators need to manage the flow of human traffic well, so that the existing dine-in experience remains unaffected while other parts of the kitchen could be used for online orders and pickup.
"Most full-service restaurants weren't designed to do a lot of takeout, so their physical infrastructure generally is not set up to do so," said Aaron Noveshen, founder and CEO of the Culinary Edge, a restaurant consulting firm.
As more kitchens reopen for dine-in service, C3 and its investors say they don't expect an easing of pandemic restrictions to take the luster off their delivery businesses. Sales in markets that have reopened might dip for a week or two, but then "we seem to go right back to full steam ahead," said Michael Beacham, REEF's president of kitchens.
"They're continuing to use this, because it's an easy alternative to get the best restaurant food that they're looking [for] brought conveniently to them," Mr. Beacham said.
As of February 2021, C3 operates 250 ghost kitchens across the U.S., the company said.
Other investors have also entered the food-delivery business. Entities tied to the former chief executive of Uber Technologies Inc. spent more than $130 million on property acquisitions[https://www.wsj.com/articles/uber-founder-turns-real-estate-mogul-for-ghost-kitchen-startup-11603186200] for CloudKitchens, a startup that rents out space to ghost kitchens, according to a Wall Street Journal analysis last year.
"Every type of restaurant is looking for alternatives to brick-and-mortar right now," said Jon Goldsmith, CEO and co-founder of Local Kitchens, a San Francisco-based ghost-kitchen startup.
Write to Esther Fung at esther.fung@wsj.com[mailto:esther.fung@wsj.com]
Shopping-Mall Giants Back Expanded Delivery-Only 'Ghost Kitchens' in Food Courts[https://www.wsj.com/articles/shopping-mall-giants-back-expanded-delivery-only-ghost-kitchens-in-food-courts-11625576401]
