HAPPINESS AT DOORSTEP
In the new normal, the changing dynamics of the cloud kitchen market in the country is bringing new opportunities
The cloud kitchen market is thriving. It is becoming a significant part of the restaurant and food industry. As people moved to a workfrom-home model, the number of online orders increased for both cloud kitchens and restaurants that have an online presence. As per industry reports, the Indian cloud kitchen market is expected to grow five times from USD 400 million in 2019 to USD 2 billion in 2024.
Cloud kitchens are not a new concept. However, post Covid-19, they picked up pace in terms of growth and orders as people banked on online deliveries more than restaurant outings. Cloud kitchens are businesses that allow restaurants to deliver straight to customers at home, maintaining safety protocols and they operate in a fraction of traditional restaurant space, utilising resources more efficiently.
Previously, there was a distinct difference between delivery-focused and dine-in brands. However, today, the clear line has blurred. Several restaurants have started implementing the concept of cloud kitchen by introducing their own separate food delivery-centric brands. The hybrid business model, combining home delivery and takeaway with dine-in, not only offers quick service and convenience, but also a restaurant-style experience to customers and diversifies revenue streams for all stakeholders, helping them to adapt to the evolving times - a win-win situation.
In these challenging times, digitisation has opened many avenues for many businesses to strengthen their operations. Cloud kitchens across the country are leveragdigital payment gateway, and promotional offers and schemes are major requirements of a cloud kitchen.
Moving ahead, the safety of customers and ensuring delivery of fresh items will be the focus areas for technology advancements and adoption. Today, many cloud kitchen setups have introduced automation in packaging and prepreparation activities that reduce the workload. Experts are trying to find more technologies ing digital technologies that are redefining the way operations and processes work. With the increasing millennial population, use of smartphones, internet services, and appbased technology, cloud kitchens are poised to grow. A strong online presence on social media platforms along with easy digital menus and hassle-free online ordering system and that will make the entire process of the kitchen automated. "The cloud kitchen market is establishing new benchmarks. The digital advancements have helped many cloud kitchen setups to establish their presence not only in metro cities but also in Tier-II and Tier-III cities in various sectors," shares Vansh Khanna, head chef and partner, Cúra: The Gourmet Take-House.
For restaurants, initial investments and operational costs are high, impacting the margin of profit for the restaurants."The cloud kitchen space has witnessed a steep growth in the last five years. Online delivery platforms accelerated this growth by aggregating demand and supply. It costs approximately USD 5000 to set up a small 300 square feet cloud kitchen in a metro city of India. Therefore, making it a low barrier to entry business," says Madhav Kasturia, founder and CEO, ZFW, a hyperlocal-fulfilment platform.
