KITCHENS GET CLOUD COVER
WHEN THE PANDEMIC HIT THE FOOD INDUSTRY HARD, FOODPRENEURS IN THE CITY CAME UP WITH THEIR OWN RECIPES FOR SUCCESS
Crisis leads to innovation, it is said. And the food industry in Bengaluru proved this right. When the pandemic hit the city last year, the sector was badly hit. But the sector found a viable solution to the problem in cloud kitchens, a cost-effective option that provides restaurant-like food at home while helping foodpreneurs. Cloud kitchens, while not a recent phenomenon, have made a major presence on the city's skyline more recently especially during the pandemic. Over the last one year, many foodpreneurs have moved on to cloud kitchens to not only sustain themselves but also do well."The pandemic took the biggest toll on the industry especially brick and mortar restaurants. Being closed for the longest time because of the forced lockdowns and panic among customers hit them hard. The damage continued post-lockdown as well and many lost their jobs. With the skill set they possess, some of them have decided to start their own business on online platforms which can be done quite easily now sans costly high street or real estate/infrastructure setup. One can operate such kitchens from any floor of a commercial place or any other accessible space," says chef Souvik Gupta, who operates a cloud kitchen in the city. This was bound to happen as the only choice left was to eat into the pie from delivery sales which is/was growing. Food aggregators played a pivotal role by providing tech and logistics support seamlesseley. Pandemic or no pandemic the industry was anyway going to evolve with new dimensions and cloud kitchens are no surprise. The Pandemic boosted the process of evolution not only for cloud kitchens but also a lot of home chefs who have made their homes cloud kitchens, he adds.
A cloud kitchen, usually situated in cost-effective area, is essentially a space where food is prepared for delivery only and has no dine-in or takeaway facilities. In many cases, small eateries come together to share a kitchen facility from where deliveries can be made easily. The advantages of operating a cloud kitchen are many. They reduce real estate costs as they do not require prime locations. Also, because of the fact that kitchen space is sometimes shared by many players and the production costs are much lower, the opportunity to scale up remains high."Cloud kitchen model in the pre-Covid era was considered a cost-saving recipe for several players within the F&B sector. However, post-pandemic, lockdowns and restrictions across the city dealt a severe blow on restaurants as many remained shut for a long time. Footfalls also dropped drastically. After ease in restrictions, social distancing norms and consumers' increased comfort of ordering food online significantly impacted their business. As a result, to minimize operating costs and capture the growing trend of catering to homedelivery of food, more and more food outlets in Bengaluru started cloud kitchens. Add to it, cloud kitchens offer a substantial cost advantage over restaurants and require lesser space, basic interiors and can operate out of a low-visibility area," says Pankaj Renjhen, COO & Jt MD, ANAROCK Retail.
Cloud Kitchens have witnessed accelerated growth post-pandemic. According to industry estimates, the gross value of India's cloud kitchen market was approximately $400 million in 2019 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 35% to be worth $2 billion in 2024. And Bengaluru is one of the top cities that will help propel this growth. Individually, the city would have definitely seen at least 15-20% growth in cloud kitchens post the pandemic, Renjhen adds.
Being an innovative and tech driven city has worked well in favour of cloud kitchens. Technology has played a crucial role in speeding up customer support and delivery operations, especially when it comes to navigation services. "The biggest concern arises when the primary benefit is being reaped by top aggregators who are currently the main service providers, end to end," says Gupta. The industry is evolving and a few new entrants are also running their systems backed by navigation support. These aggregators are for indigenous services and currently outside the scope of what primary aggregators are offering. Despite being less popular for now, it is likely that the new players will catch up eventually with the increasing demand of logistics companies, Gupta adds. The current scenario is witnessing not only individual cloud kitchens, but also companies trying to be aggregators for cloud kitchens.
Agrees Renjhen, saying: "The tech-driven nature of the city has worked in its favour. IT professionals in the city have gradually gained a penchant for most things online from food, to daily groceries and clothes, tech now aids every sector. The demographic advantage of the city has been a major driving factor. Millennials or the new-age workforce is hooked to their smartphones and have ample disposable income. Many of them are hard pressed for time which in turn has given rise to the trend of affordable and easily accessible meals. And many of these cloud kitchens are just catering to this audience."Leveraging their core strength in technology, delivery and discount distribution, food aggregators now provide the infrastructure and logistics to local F&B enterprises by way of cloud kitchens. The trend not only benefits food delivery aggregators, but restaurant owners and caterers too are now getting on board, with the models varying from company to company.
The second wave of the pandemic has made people cautious about their safety. M Rohit, a cloud kitchen owner, says, "To stay safe and eliminate any chance of spreading the virus isn't a one-sided effort by retailers. The consumer must understand that the onus is equally on them to be safe for everyone including fellow consumers and people working at these places." Cloud kitchen brands need to ensure safety and hygiene in their operations and brands that understand and adapt to the changing consumer behaviour and are genuinely able to build trust with their customers will likely come out thriving, he adds.
