Grocers are rethinking their industry
Dalhousie University professor says stores will be repurposed as food prices continue to climb
It was only a year ago that photos and videos of empty supermarket shelves, overflowing shopping carts and lines snaking around parking lots dominated Twitter timelines, fuelling the urge to panic buy and stock up on enough dried beans to justify buying all that toilet paper.
A year later, most shoppers are still limiting their trips to the grocers, or having groceries delivered to their homes as the COVID-19 pandemic is far from over. Still, it is much different than it was a year ago.
Sylvain Charlebois, a professor and director of Dalhousie University's Agri-Food Analytics Lab, has become the go-to expert in the past year when it comes to what's happening in supermarkets across the country. The Star asked Charlebois what 2021 will be like for shoppers.
The empty shelves and panic buying aren't likely to happen again
"We were dealing with an unknown virus last year and didn't know how public health officials would manage things," Charlebois said. "I walked into a store not knowing when I could go back in again and that's why there was a feeling of having to buy everything in sight."
Food distributors were also used to shipping a portion of their goods to restaurants, hotels, banquet halls, etc. When those were shut down overnight, there was a scramble to get that food into supermarkets, which is an entirely different supply chain. Not to mention, the food meant for a restaurant is packaged differently than it would be for a home cook, so suppliers had to repackage food in smaller quantities. (Remember all those stories of people buying 50 lb. bags of flour from wholesalers?)
A report from Dalhousie University's Agri-Food Analytics Lab found that pre-pandemic, 60 per cent of food sales were in food retail (e.g. grocers) compared to 40 per cent in food service (e.g. restaurants). At the beginning of the pandemic when many restaurants were completely closed, about 91 per cent of food sales went to food retail while nine per cent went to food service.
"Nothing had pivoted yet, so that pressure had to be absorbed by grocers overnight. The hens didn't stop laying eggs," he said.
"It was about rerouting them from the restaurant to the grocery store from March to May and June. Things calmed down after that."
Charlebois said the percentage is now closer to 75 per cent food retail versus 25 per cent food service as people are ordering takeout, experiencing cooking fatigue and not buying groceries in the amounts they were before.
"The people working in food service really delivered and were successful in stepping up to make sure people had access to food," he said.
Supermarkets are
rethinking storefronts
With the possibility of working-from-home a permanent fixture for some businesses, retailers are also rethinking what's considered prime real estate if the number of commuters drops going forward and online grocery shopping becomes increasingly common.
Charlebois points to the recent news of Walmart Canada announcing six stores will be closing and $500 million will be used to upgrade existing stores and online business.
"I suspect for the next 12 to 24 months, the big emphasis is to try to generate as much growth as possible. You'll see grocers look into providing more services, restaurants looking into retail, even Kraft-Heinz has ghost kitchens now. Everything is up for grabs online and offline," he said.
"I'm not saying the market is overstored, but more stores will be repurposed or relocated to service a different market for sure."
The risk in pivoting to more distribution centres rather than storefronts, he adds, could result in some neighbourhoods having fewer grocery options as well as job losses for retail workers.
Grocery bills are going up
The cost of groceries continue to rise year after year (about 1.2 per cent higher in January than in 2020), especially when it comes to meat.
Charlebois previously told the Star that data trackers such as Statistics Canada aren't including the costs of delivery services into grocery bills, so the price of food is overall higher than what the data shows.
There's also talk of a supercycle happening, which is when strong demand for certain commodities (such as metals, oil and agricultural products like corn and soy) drives up global prices.
This is spurred by stimulus spending by governments around the world in an attempt to get their economies going after the pandemic.
This, compounded by people being laid off, working less and not seeing wages keep up with food inflation, means it's still going to be a rough year for many.
A slow return
to sustainability
Green initiatives were put on hold last year as many grocers didn't allow customers to bring their shopping bags out of fear of viral transmission. But now that the risk of infection through surface contact has been deemed very low by experts, the reusable bags are back, along with a few green initiatives from large grocers.
Charlebois points to Loblaws rolling out a reusable container program for certain grocery items as one example.
