Kolkata restaurants register an uptick in home delivery as Omicron fear looms large
Omicron is spreading its tentacles across the country and with fresh curbs on gatherings by WHO and local authorities, Kolkata's food and beverages industry is again on high alert for Christmas. As most people are now planning to avoid crowded places and are also refraining from stepping out to celebrate, city eateries have started getting more orders for home delivery. But then, the dining rooms are not empty either.
According to home chefs, restaurateurs and hotel spokespersons, home deliveries started increasing from the first week of December and the graph is still upward. Amandeep Singh, a home chef and the owner of a cloud kitchen, said, "With our Christmas special menu, we have registered a rise of almost 50% in home delivery. It is evident that people are getting cautious and not very keen to come out of their homes," he said.
Trina Mukherjee, spokesperson of a five-star hotel on EM Bypass, said that since home delivery has started gaining momentum, they are giving more importance to that segment now. "The home delivery system has been a lifeline for us since the first lockdown. But we are giving equal importance to dine-in as well. However, of late, the number of home delivery has definitely increased," she affirmed.
While home deliveries have gone up, Kolkata streets are far from empty. Restaurateur Debaditya Chowdhury, who is witnessing 15% rise in home delivery orders, explained, "While a section of people is aware of the situation and is taking precautions by not stepping out, the other part is comfortable going out to eat and make merry."During the first lockdown last year, several hotels and restaurants created their own delivery chains along with the food delivery apps, which are coming in handy now. The big establishments have increased their production according to demand. Besides, they are procuring ingredients, a bit more than necessary, to meet future requirements. The spokesperson of a Park Street hotel said, "Along with maintaining every COVID protocol for dine-in guests, home delivery orders for the Christmas special menus have increased. Our turkey preparations are the current bestsellers and we serve freshly cooked meals to our customers. Besides, there are options for ordering from curated menus as well," she added. The cloud kitchens and home chefs are trying their best to meet the constantly increasing demand. "We have been preparing 15% extra food for the last few days to deliver last-minute orders and we are getting sold out every day. We have to work even harder to deliver Christmas orders tonight," said Tamalika Acharya, a home chef.
Local eateries too are having a déjà vu moment of sorts. "Considering the kind of orders we are getting, we have come to the conclusion that just like last year, many people have gone back to house-party mode. We have started getting orders for groups of five to eight people. We know it is for house parties because they tend to order more finger food and starters compared to a family dinner, where main courses dominate starters and even desserts," said Amandeep.
