Category Watch - Food Staples: Good-for-You Food Products have Seen Rising Demand Over the Past Year
Brands that have already benefited From pandemic trends will continue To see potential opportunities in Their product categories. But both Retailers and manufacturers have The opportunity to “reset” what Value means to consumers and how They are best placed to meet the New needs moving forward.In the early days of the pandemic, many wondered why it was so hard to find basic food items of everyday consumption in local supermarkets and even online.
These product shortages were attributed by many to COVID-19's fear-driven purchases by consumers as they hoarded everyday products and stocked their pantries.When the government intensified the measures to battle the Covid-19 outbreak with a country-wide lockdown, fastmoving consumer goods (FMCG) companies and their retailers said demand surged, mainly due to the strict measures and movement restrictions imposed to contain the outbreak.Consumers in major cities in India started to stock up on essential items, such as staples, packaged food and cooking oils. But there were also shortages of our favorite beverages and snacks, not necessarily the things we can’t live without, but rather the things we don’t want to live without, as food companies had to trim down their production pipelines.In those early days of lockdowns, grocery shortages ranged from reasonably concerning to harmlessly annoying. For example, the surge in panic-buying caused shortages of even the most common staple like fl our, which understandably scared many consumers.But while these bulk purchases did play a small part in some of the shortages, the primary driver was consumers’ increased time spent at home during lockdown and work-from home initiatives. All of these factors provided the impetus for the resulting shift in consumption and increased demand for everyday staples products.“Stocking up behavior was observed across FMCG categories in the initial phase of the Covid pandemic. The panic buying gradually subsided, but we observed a shift to the bigger-sized packs. Also, with the Covid lockdowns, online at-home access to groceries has become the preferred mode. Therefore, the e-Grocery space is experiencing an interesting turn of events that is providing a boost to the food sector and, we too, have witnessed the same,” observes Paras Budhiraja, Managing Director, Paras Nutritions Pvt. Ltd., which recently launched range of ‘Immunity Boosters’ that has received a huge demand from the market as the product helps the body to fight against bacteria, viruses and other disease-causing pathogens, making it a grocery essential in the current scenario.Covid has upended the demand for packaged healthy foodIn fact, consumption of staple food products and packaged food considered healthy have undergone a massive shift as consumers are spending more time at home. COVID-19 and stay-at-home directives have shifted consumption channels and had a disproportionate impact on demand for certain everyday products. At the same time, consumers have shown preference to opt for healthy and hygienic packaged foods over foods sold loose.One vivid example of consumers taking to packaged foods in large numbers can be found in the case of coconut water, which is consumed in large quantities via the unorganized market. It is estimated that the unorganized coconut water market in India is close to Rs. 5,000 crore. But this unorganized market is now fast transitioning to the organized market and, Covid has, in fact, accelerated this process.“Rather than consuming coconut water from the vendor, consumers are now looking for neatly packaged hygienic coconut water due to health concerns, and hence we expect that this Rs. 5,000 crore unorganized market will rapidly turn into an organized one leading to an explosion in sales in the near future,” affirms Arjun Gadkari, Director, Nilgai Foods Private Limited, which makes coconut-based health products for modern-day well-being.These emerging trends in the wake of the pandemic have consequently belied the fears that the Covid pandemic and the ensuing lockdowns would hit food brands hard. In reality, several packaged food players across different product categories have shown resilience and their products have, actually, seen a growth surge and increased sales.Research suggests that many people will continue to work from home even after the pandemic recedes, so this trend is likely to last into the near future. Another reason for this demand uptick is that people are slowly understanding the benefits of healthy packaged food, especially in these pandemic times. Consumers want to stay fit and healthy and everyone has started to focus on their diet. The demand for products that provide a variety of health benefits has increased a lot during the pandemic.While the timing and trajectory of the overall demand recovery in the food sector back to pre-pandemic norms is up for debate, it does appear that some of society’s altered habits will be structural. According to one research study, an estimated 42% of workers who were employed in March last year have transitioned to fully working from home today.Importantly, while some of those workers will ultimately return to the office, the study suggests that the share of working days spent at home is expected to rise structurally, by approximately 300% compared to pre-COVID-19 levels. So, the shifting channel dynamics and large demand swings, as a result of consumers spending more time at home, is unlikely to end in the near term.These changes have and will likely continue to result in a more dynamic market for consumer staples, with increased dispersion of winners and losers. It is in this type of environment, fundamental due diligence and active portfolio management by food manufacturers and brands can significantly contribute to relative outperformance. Such brands that have already benefited from pandemic trends, such as more time spent at home, will continue to see potential opportunities in their product categories.“Consumers are becoming more knowledgeable and are open to trying out new things. They are making informed decisions on the basis of a product’s health benefits,” says Pathik Patel, Designated Partner, Fit&Flex By Niva Nutrifoods, a young granola brand, which has not only been able to increase the consumer base for its products by also seen very encouraging signs of repeat purchases of its products. “Consumers want to stay fit and healthy and everyone has started to focus on their diet. Our granola boosts immunity and keeps the gut healthy, which are the most sought-after benefits for consumers, especially during these times,” he adds. Opportunities for retailersThe pandemic has completely rewired how consumers shop and has also led to a rise in sales in the grocery market. Also, for many grocery retailers, 2020 ended newly gained Covid customers. But the big question for many retailers will be whether they can hold onto their new customers in 2021 and beyond.To answer that question, retailers need to look inward and ask if the surges in YOY growth were due to internal changes they made or were they due to external factors such as how consumers shopped and prepared food. Dunnhumby’s research found that 2020 upended consumers’ preferences, and instead of prioritizing value and quality most, they now wanted “speed” above all else. Coinciding with the greater availability of vaccines — consumers, for the first time since the pandemic began, are beginning to feel more confident and are now prioritizing value over speed when they shop.With the pandemic expected to fade over the coming months, some of the new behaviors consumers began in earnest in 2020 will stick — online shopping and using multiple shopping tactics to find value — while others will fall away. But once the dust settles, customer preference drivers will look more like pre-COVID than they did during COVID. Value above all will be king.One thing that retailers should keep in mind is the retail environment has fundamentally changed amid months of restricted living. Stockpiling, out-of-stocks and supply chain challenges meant that in many markets, promotional programs came to an abrupt halt, or were significantly cutback. Having broken the cycle of promotional reliance, consumers’ perception of value and price sensitivity will change the longer restrictions remain in place. Retailers and manufacturers have the opportunity to “reset” what value means to consumers and how they are best placed to meet the new needs moving forward.The effectiveness of pricing mechanisms will differ by category in today’s new retail reality. For some non-expandable categories that benefited from quarantine living, like specific staples and essentials, promotions are going to remain less effective than they were precrisis. But other categories, like out-of-home/on-the-go snacks, confectionery, and soft drinks, may continue to depend on promotions to entice in-home consumption and invigorate demand even as some living restrictions ease.This situation offers retailers and brands the chance to rethink and reset their direction moving forward. Everyday low prices (EDLP), shallower discount levels, and economy or bonus packs may be better ways to incentivize loyalty to both brands and retailers as consumers continue to limit their number of shopping trips and visits to multiple stores.Moving forward, this shift will test consumers’ traditional store loyalties as restrictions lift and things normalize. It will, therefore, be paramount for retailers to understand the unique consumer needs and priorities of different groups. This will ensure they’re able to offer tailored pricing offerings to retain consumers moving forward and ensure profitability in these challenging times.
