Pune: Eateries limit operations amid struggle to stay afloat as Covid 3rd wave fears loom
Pune news: Restaurant owners face tremendous troubles as most of them are getting out of business.
Pune: Eateries limit operations amid struggle to stay afloat as Covid 3rd wave fears loom[https://imgk.timesnownews.com/story/iStock-_restaurant_hotel_closed.jpg?tr=w-600]
Pune: The fear of the third Covid wave persists among people, no matter how the curbs have been lifted and people have started to step out. AN eatery in Kondhwa, which opened for home deliveries after some restrictions were lifted, begun to have dine-in services with only two tables.
The restaurant manager told The Times of India that the hotel has enough space to incorporate ten tables, but due to staff crunch post-Covid, they are unable to do so. He added that almost 40% of the staff is not returning.
Another eatery, famous for its kebabs and grilled food, faced losses amid lockdown. They also started dine-in services. The owner of the restaurant claims that many people do not come to the shop except on weekends. The shortage of staff is also another pile to our problems.
"We have slowly started with dine-in rather than going in all guns blazing as we cannot handle more losses," he further said.
As per reports, almost 2,000 of 8,000 eateries in the Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad areas have permanently shut. Senior officials of Pune Restaurants and Hotel Association (PRAHA) told TOI that out of the 6,000 restaurants left, 900 eateries are yet to start the dine-in services because of restrictions such as 50% capacity and closing time of 10 pm.
Ganesh Shetty, the president of PRAHA, said that the state government should open restaurants at a total 100% capacity now with timings also extended. The businesses are at a halt since March 2020, when the lockdown began, and haven't been able to fully recover the losses suffered during that tenure.
Shetty believes that the restaurants can only be operational in such times if the government exempts them from property tax. A sizzler restaurant in Koregaon Park that reopened after the second wave is facing massive troubles as the restaurant owner is in debt and is unable to recover from it.
"There is no point in doing business like this. We cannot afford the rent," the owner of the eatery said.
