The great restaurant price hike: Eateries across the country are raising prices after soaring inflation sees ingredients costs DOUBLE in just one year
* A perfect storm of rising oil costs, supply chain issues and labor shortages is driving some restaurants to put prices up
* Alan Natkiel, owner of New Hampshire restaurant Georgia's Northside, said costs had spiked in the last 3 months, forcing him to put up prices
* He said the cost of brisket has gone up 185%, chicken breast is up 70%, and fryer oil costs have doubled in the past three months
* National chains such as IHOP and Applebee's say their costs have also shot up, and may be forced to pass that on to consumers
* Inflation rose 4.2% in the last 12 months, its highest rate since 2008
A New Hampshire restaurateur has apologized to customers for putting prices up after the cost of basic items like oil, meat and gloves rose by as much as 300%.
Alan Natkiel, the owner of Georgia's Northside in Concord, says the price of brisket has gone up 185%, chicken breast is up 70%, and fryer oil costs have doubled in the past three months, while plastic gloves were three times as expensive as pre-pandemic prices.
The price of disposable gloves have soared by 300%.
Natkiel says the surge in prices has even forced him to stop serving chicken wings as a national shortage has made them so pricey they were no longer commercially viable.
He shared his frustration in a Facebook[https://www.facebook.com/georgiasnorthside] post at having to put meal prices up, as inflation reaches its highest level since 2008.
'You don't want to be like, 'Hey customers, I just raised the price of your food because I have a glove issue,' he told WMUR.com[https://www.wmur.com/article/local-nh-restaurant-costs-increase-meal-costs-rise-for-customers/36509145].
'They don't really want to hear that.'
The latest Consumer Price Index summary released this month by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics showed overall prices rose by 4.2% in the 12 months to May.
Gas prices across the US have now hit a seven-year high of $3.04 a gallon, according to the AAA, increasing the price of shipping.
Continuing supply chain disruptions from the pandemic are causing shortages in key fresh food and produce areas.
And a chronic labor shortage is placing added pressure on restaurants.
Natkiel does all of the shopping for Georgia's Northside and is acutely sensitive to price rises, and says his grocery bills are 25% higher this month.
'Where there's smoke, there's fire, and financially, it was blazing,' he told Fox Business[https://www.foxbusiness.com/economy/restaurants-raising-prices-inflation].
He said he wanted to be transparent with his customers about why he was passing on the increase in prices - even when it proved unpopular.
'People see an increase in prices of meat at the grocery store, but, by and large, they don't see oil prices, they don't see glove prices and no one wants to hear [that] your burger is an extra dollar because gloves cost more money.'
Natkeil said he had shared the reasons for putting up the prices with his customers to be transparent, and he would reduce meal prices as soon as his expenses went back down.
The reasons for the price increases are complex, often interconnected and many relate to the economy emerging from the tumult caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. experts say.
Food production was severely disrupted by lockdowns, and coronavirus outbreaks at manufacturing plants caused thousands of deaths in the US alone.
International shipping was similarly thrown into disarray by the lockdown, causing delays to the 15% of America's overall food supply that is imported from countries such as China and France.
As much as 65% of the seafood consumed in the US is is imported, and according to recent data from NielsenIQ prices are up 18.7% in three months.
The NielsenIQ survey showed 50 of 52 food categories tracked by the survey were more expensive than a year ago, with only butter and milk having held flat.
'Everyone is looking to offset higher transportation costs, higher labor costs and higher input costs,' said Bloomberg Intelligence analyst Jennifer Bartashus.
'And that flows through the whole chain all the way to the consumer. Inflation expectations for 2021 are much higher than they've been in recent years.'
Job vacancy figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows there were 1,254,000 job vacancies in leisure and hospitality in March, up from 956,000 the previous month.
Then there's changes to consumer habits brought on by the pandemic, with far more people eating at home, and extreme weather events such as the three severe winter storms that caused the power grid in Texas to lockdown.
The Department of Agriculture is warning prices may continue to rise for the next 12 months.
The USDA estimates that the cost of key food components, like soybeans and wheat, will increase by at least 5% in 2021, further driving up the cost of staples like pasta and cereal. Prices for fruits like apples, strawberries and citrus already have spiked 11.3% this year.
The price increases could soon impact prices at national chain restaurants.
At TGI Friday's, pork prices are putting pressure on their bottom line, CEO Ray Blanchette told Bloomberg earlier this month.
The CEO of Dine Brands Global, which operates Applebee's and IHOP, told Bloomberg that packaging, pork and pancake mix prices were putting pressure on overall costs.
'Commodity and labor costs have got upward pressure on them right now,' chief executive John Peyton said.
And gas prices increases are partly being blamed on the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack earlier this month, which resulted in the shutdown of 5,500 miles of pipeline.
In Argentina, the world's fourth-largest beef exporter, the administration of center-left Peronist President Alberto Fernández banned meat exports earlier this month for a 30-day period to tamp down domestic food prices, amid a long economic crisis that has been deepened by the COVID-19 pandemic, Reuters reported.
The country blames China's increasing demand for beef for stoking domestic prices.
Mike Salguero, chief executive of online subscription meat company ButcherBox.com, told the Washington Post[https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2021/05/29/beef-pork-retail-prices-skyrocket/] 'the best antidote for high prices is high prices.
'As they go up really high, demand will slacken and prices will go down.'
