Audrow Nash: This is a
conversation with Jason Richards. Jason is the CEO of
Daxbot, which makes a charismatic robot for food
delivery. We talk about deck spots delivery robot, their
crowdfunding campaign, that spot revenue model, how Jason works
with lawmakers to have robots on the sidewalks. And Jason teases
their real time operating system. DaxOS. This is the Sense
Think Act podcast. And thank you to our founding sponsor, Open
Robotics. Now, here's my conversation with Jason
Richards. Would you introduce yourself? Jason Richards: Sure, you bet.
My name is Jason Richards. And I am the CEO of Daxbot. Audrow Nash: Would you tell me a
bit about Daxbot? Jason Richards: Sure, yeah. So
Daxbot is a robotics company that started out at a research
and development lab back 2015, the founder, started a couple
other companies, pretty successful guy, and decided that
he wanted to create a research and development lab to, you
know, what is the next wave of technology that we can get in
front of, you know, and so, in 2015, one of the thoughts was,
okay, well, we need robots to be able to do things. And there's
plenty of plenty of robots in the, you know, in the workforce,
you know, more in factories and things like that. But how do we
bridge the gap into the next generation of robotics, where
you have robots that are on the streets, similar to, you know,
iRobot? Before the robots go bad kind of thing? It's like the
movie being able to say, yeah, like, Audrow Nash: not the company
backs the back. Yeah. Jason Richards: Not No, no, not
that company. No, yeah, the movie, right. So you can tell a
robot, Hey, pick up that, and go watch that window. And robots
are smart enough to go and do it in human space. So that was the
idea. And looking at what things could be most helpful out of the
chute, is the delivery seemed like a natural first thing that
a robot could do that would be pretty simple, you know, simple
tasks that would be helpful to humans. So so that's where the
idea came from. And so as of recently, we just got through
restructuring companies now we're dexpot, Inc. and now we're
able to go after and commercialize and, and have
robots now being deployed to different states around the
country where you before? Yeah, so before is Nova dynamics. So
Nova dynamics was the research and development incubator. And
they've got several projects, Dax as the robot was kind of the
big one. And so with that platform, we knew that at some
point, it has to move out of the r&d Lab and into its own entity
that can be commercialized and become something Gotcha. So. So
that was the next step. So as of last year, when you know, all
the research and development last year, when COVID hit, it
was a great opportunity to start getting robots out in the field,
in our local hometown, because restaurants, people aren't
coming to, you know, restaurants are closing their doors. But
people aren't wanting to see people. So it seemed like a
great space. And it was, you know, for that beta test, being
able to take robots that we have go to the restaurants, pick up
food, and then ticket to people's houses, you know, all
without seeing a human was really highlighted the need for
this type of technology. And it is well received. And it was a
great, great beta test for us. So January of this year
realizing okay, we've got a product that is ready to go
awesome. So commercialized and Audrow Nash: here we go. Hell
yeah. Tell me can you describe what Dex looks like? Jason Richards: Yeah, so Dax is
a robot? It's about right. Yeah, yeah, if you're, if you're
watching the video, you can see the one behind and it's about
three foot tall, and white and black, kind of a reverse tuxedo
type situation. And so you see, you see, Dax has got a fully
articulated neck so that he's able to look all around and look
up and down also has LED panel eyes. So the eyes are able to be
expressive, you know, whether it is being able to be hearts or
you know, I love you going to sleep blinking, so that it has
some sort of emotional response from another human. So that is
and then the, the cargo that's the thing that everybody asks,
well, if it's the delivery robot, where's the cargo bay,
and it's actually inside the stomach. So what you think of
the stomach of this little creature, for people that
haven't seen DAX before, I'd encourage you to go, you could
check out DAX spot.com. You can see pictures of him and that
kind of thing, but, but inside the drawer, which is where his
stomach is, is where the payload goes. And then inside that is,
you know, heating elements. We've got to design for a
refrigerator so that we can do that's cool pharmaceutical
delivery. Yeah, things that need it, which is pretty. That was a
pretty astounding thing from the engineers perspective to be able
to build a refrigerator Inside the robot, obviously, it takes
up a lot of space with a compressor and, and heat
exchange, especially in that type of area. But fascinating,
and we did a lot of cool testing with that one. But so that is is
Dax. Audrow Nash: And so, to me, Dax,
I was gonna say refrigerator, like a little like college dorm
freezer kind of thing. Right? It's kind of looks like one of
those. And then it has this articulated kind of like
hexagonal head that has the LED lights on it. And that head is
on a neck that seems to have a few degrees of freedom, which
I'm sure we'll talk more about that later. And we can't see it
in the video now because of how the cameras positioned. But DAX
is on tank treads, right? Yep, gotcha. Correct. And to me, Dax
looks a lot like Wally without arms. And like, you say, like,
the belly is where you store the payload. So whatever you're
delivering, like in Wally Wally was designed to have that trash
compactor there and its belly. So it seems kind of similar to
me. Right. And the tank treads. Yeah, these kinds of things.
Yeah, we, Jason Richards: we joke about
the fact that Dax kind of looks like Wally and Eve had a baby.
And that baby. Audrow Nash: That is right,
because of the coloring. Yeah. And the sleek design color in
the scheme. Yep. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Okay. Tell me a bit about the
neck. Or the head, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Jason Richards: So the getting
the biggest piece that we wanted to solve was, you know, the
human robot interaction piece. There other than delivery
robots. There's a lot of people that will ask about that, you
know, why? Essentially another delivery robot. And it's it's
kind of funny because, you know, Dax was built people are
familiar with starship, Dax and starship started almost the
exact same time not familiar with starship as far as what a
starship? Oh, yeah. So start. Yeah, so starship is a delivery
robot on some college campuses. And if you look up delivery
robots, if you just Google it, you'll find you know, kiwi, bot,
and starship. And there's some others. And essentially the
same, the design is exactly the same. It's about it looks
essentially like a cooler with a couple of wheels on it. And so
it has a payload and it's, it's useful in some applications. But
with the the neck and the eyes, it was more of, you know, how do
you create something that is going to be accepted in human
pedestrian spaces. So so that's where the idea of, you know,
articulating neck head, not putting sensors all over the
place, and the founder, you know, dexpot really wanted to
make sure that it wasn't creepy. You know, there's, there's
plenty of really cool, like, mechanically amazing feats that
people are coming up with, you know, as far as like mechanics
of robots, you know, bipeds, those types of things. But if
if, for example, you just saw, you know, two legs, two robotic
legs running you down the street, you'd think that
Armageddon was happening, I mean, that that would be a
creepy thing. So wanting to make something that would be accepted
in human space. So there's a lot of work that went into that, of
how do we make a robot that people want to have around? So
So delivery robots, most of them have that design of a cooler on
wheels, and about two feet off the ground. And it becomes an
annoyance for a lot of people, because it's it's in the way,
similarly, people don't really, people don't even want bicycles
on sidewalks, right? And it's a human on that bicycle, but it's
annoying and pedestrian space. And so they make bicycles Audrow Nash: that cars have. And
so I don't know if it's quite the same thing. I get that
they're also annoying, but perhaps it's like, they go fast.
And there's the potential to like, get hit by a bike
bicyclist or something like this or them for to come out of
nowhere. Yeah. Whereas I don't know that small tub robot would
be quite the same thing. Or what do you think? Jason Richards: No. Yeah, the
biggest piece had to do with with visibility is not being you
know, not being able to see it. If it's it knee height, it's
different than if it's it, you know, waist height, or, you
know, shoulder catches. Audrow Nash: So it's like a
mobile piece of furniture to trip over if it's short, and
that could irritating. Okay. Jason Richards: Yeah. Yeah. And
same way. I mean, you know, people don't like skateboarders
on on sidewalk. Yeah. Again, moving fast, though. Remote
Control often, yeah, some of it could be moving fast. And it's
in a way it's becomes a tripping hazard, that kind of thing. And
so the interesting thing with Dax is that with all the testing
we've done on the HRIS side of it, is you know, especially kids
love Dax, it's about the same height and so they can give it a
hug, and it's looking them like almost either with very cute and
with and with the neck itself. And the reason that we didn't
want to creepy with sensors all over the place, people ask,
well, it has 360 degree cameras in it, for example. You know,
it's kind of an assumption a lot of engineers have, it's like,
No, there's not 360 degree cameras in it. And people always
want to know why it's like, well, you don't have 360 degree
cameras and you know, you can kind of hear that their stuff
behind you. And so you can, you know, you have some sense and
awareness of what's around you. But you're not a spider, right?
You don't have this spidey sense where you can you know that
something's behind you. So in the same way, that's where the
articulating that came from, you know, you could have something
that that knows everything around it in a 360 degree view,
or you have something that actually is more like, you know,
more like a dog or a human, where you actually have to turn
your neck around to see what is actually going on. But yeah, and
so even those those pieces, it gives it a feeling that it is
actually alive, instead of just being a machine, which why not?
It actually is machine. Audrow Nash: So I mean, I'm
thinking of this thing, where it's like airplanes don't flap
their wings kind of thing. So I mean, we can draw some
inspiration from biology. But where do we end Drawing
inspiration? From biology? Absolutely. And I wonder, I
would think it would be possible to use cleverly hidden sensors
and to have the articulating neck, but have the articulating
neck not necessarily tied to a vision system. Why Why limit it
to having the vision system on the articulating neck instead of
just having hidden sensors and this kind of thing? Jason Richards: Yeah, that's a
good question. I don't know, the, the founder when he went
through all of this, there was a lot of there was a lot of, you
know, reasoning and things like that. And again, making it more
a phrase that we use around here is anamorphic. You know, it's
not anamorphic. It's not an ad. Cannon morphic. I don't know who
doesn't like thrupp amorphic are more like a like a dog. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, it seems more like it's a pet than it is a machine. Audrow Nash: So anamorphic. So
it's like anthropomorphic animal. So when we assume but
with cane, but for things like dogs, or whatever it might be,
okay, so it's a creature and has some sort of intent when it
moves around the world or whatever it might be. Right. Jason Richards: Yeah, exactly.
And so one of the things, for example, is, I believe one of
the stories I heard is that if Dax you know, robot goes into a
situation and needs to go backwards. You know, we as we as
humans, don't walk backwards, right? We don't just like walk
backwards into into us, yes, we will turn and say, Oh, here's
where we're going to go. And then, you know, if we need to
have some field division in front of us, we'll be looking
back and forth. So in the same way, wanting to train, train the
robot, right train the neural net, so that it's not just doing
things automatically. So it actually is showing intent, that
oh, here's where I'm going. One of the things that we've heard,
we actually, we live close to a university, Oregon State
University. And one of in starship, one of those
competitors is up there. And I haven't heard, I haven't talked
to anybody around that really likes them on campus. And the
reason for that is because it has to do with intent. So the
device will drive up to a street corner, and then stop. And then
all the other traffic, the cars are like, What are you doing?
Yeah, what do I do? Yeah, is it gonna cross? Am I gonna cross
there's no clarity? No, there's no law about right of way. Yeah,
exactly. So there's sensors, no signaling, there's, there's no
idea, you know, are you going to go am I going to go and so it's,
you know, some of these devices have been hit one guy hit by a
train that's been hit by a truck, one's one into a train.
And so it's, you know, and it has has plenty of sensors
onboard. You know, that's, you know, with that one
specifically, it's, that's not the problem. But because people
don't know what it's gonna do, they don't have any, any idea
versus Dax will get to the street corner, and like a human,
it will look at you, and it will watch you and follow your
vehicle as it drives past. So you know, oh, this thing sits
somewhere. And it's aware of what's going on. And it cannot
its head, like, yes, you can go Go ahead, or, you know, shake
its head so that people know, Oh, you want me to go? Versus
you're gonna go right. And so there was a lot of there was a
lot of thought and intentionality into the neck.
Yeah, isn't just necessary for the neck sake, but it's more for
communication, it looks one of the design, Audrow Nash: it looks to me. So
thinking of like the founders perspective, and this kind of
thing, perhaps it had something to do with making it so that so
I mean, if you have sensors everywhere, and you can get a
really good rendering of the world and this kind of thing.
You can design behavior that uses that understanding of the
world. But in this case, you're kind of constraining the
behavior of the robot to be something that seems more
natural. In like, it has to go and look behind it. There's
something if it's going to go and back up or if it wants to,
like look both ways for the street, you have to do that with
the head. And it almost so it basically constrains the
developers to like, I don't know program more lifelike behavior
in it so that it operates in the world. I could see that being a
clever way of doing that kind of thing. Jason Richards: And for for
engineers, specifically, mechanical engineers, they would
much prefer to have the device to be a cooler, right? Just
right. Yeah, that's it, that's a much simpler thing than a fully
articulating neck was dual pitch motors. Right? Audrow Nash: Yeah. Or just a
sensor information would be probably more valuable.
Absolutely. The who cares if it looks like a cooler, but I get
your meaning that for like, sensors everywhere and full 3d
map of the whole environment that it's in and this kind of
thing? Jason Richards: Yeah. Yeah,
absolutely. And we, you know, obviously, we got, you know,
that technology to be able to do that, so that Dax is able to
learn in 3d space, and you know, instead but, again, more similar
to, you know, a human if I'm walking down the street, and
I've been down that street before, I have an idea of what
to expect, right? I know, there's a curb there. I know.
There's a telephone pole. I see. Oh, there's a box there. I've
never seen that box before. Okay. New information might not
be there tomorrow. Right? So it's not something that that
really comes in. But because everything is changing in such a
rapid space, again, on a factory floor, Audrow Nash: you mean in the
environment? Like walking around? Jason Richards: Right, yeah. And
environment or walking? Right. If you're walking downtown, you
know, in a metropolitan area has a lot of moving parts. It's
changing all the time. Yeah, exactly. So so being able to
have something that is more lifelike to be able to adapt in
that environment. And it seems more natural in that
environment. Actually, pretty interesting. Audrow Nash: So what sensors are
on this robot on the Dax robot? Jason Richards: Yeah, so despair
division is is one of the two it has Audrow Nash: a stereo that has
two cameras beneath the kind of chin. Yes, something right below
the display. Right. And Jason Richards: yeah, so yeah,
where you see the display of the eyes is where that Audrow Nash: just been, you
know, just beneath it. Yeah. Cuz I think I see that a little
circles from the cameras that it has. So you have the two
cameras. And from that, you can infer some 3d information about
what's in front of the robot. Okay. Yeah. Anything else? I
mean, I imagine there's encoders and things on the wheels, or the
track. Oh, yeah. What, uh, and then all the motors have sensors
and things. But what else for perception? Jason Richards: Is it just those
cameras? Maybe microphones? Yeah. Yeah. So it's got, yeah,
it's got stereo microphones. See, so you can hear what's
going on. Again, kind of that sense. If you're, if you're a
human, you can hear somebody coming up behind you, right? You
don't have eyes in the back of your head, but you can hear that
something is happening. And you're more aware of your
environment that way. So, so yeah, those those. It's fun.
When I when I talk to people about sensors, a lot of times
they're thinking very unilaterally, and they're
thinking about, like Lidar and Audrow Nash: things. Jason Richards: Yeah, exactly.
Yeah. Like LiDAR, ultrasonic. I Audrow Nash: mean, I'm honestly
surprised. You don't have like a plane or lighter or anything in
there. But if you can do everything with vision, that's
great. Jason Richards: Yeah, yeah,
it's, it's pretty fascinating, obviously, yeah, the tracks have
sensors, things like that, you know, when we're going into, you
know, autonomy, things like that. Being able to have tracks
to be able to know, even if you lose, you know, GPS signal and
that kind of thing, you're able to know, within, you know,
centimeter to where you're at in your thing. Audrow Nash: The tracks are very
accurate for encoding it. And that's probably because they
don't slip as much as wheels might. Jason Richards: Correct. Yep.
Yeah, exactly. Audrow Nash: So Gotcha. Okay, so
going back to the neck, you have these two cameras, and those are
that's the majority of the bed that is the big perception
sensor, the two cameras, and then you have stereo
microphones, or whatever it's called, so that you can tell
directionality of the sound, right? Yeah. Great. That's
that's pretty much it for perception. Other than like,
actually, I forget what it's called now, like dead reckoning
your position for from the tracks and this kind of thing. Jason Richards: Yeah. But that's
it. Yep. Yeah, Audrow Nash: that's it you've
like, are there like capacitive sensors? So it can tell if it's
being pat or hugged or anything like this? Or how do you detect
like, a person is your buyer interact? I guess the cameras
would do that. But do anything for a person touching it or
anything? Jason Richards: No, no, not.
We've, you know, talked about that a little bit. It's not, we
don't know, how helpful that would be at this point. You
know, everything, everything has to have, you know, some lead
time and stuff like Audrow Nash: that. What do you
mean meantime, Jason Richards: you know, just
which I like to do is that just takes time. Gotcha. Yeah, yeah.
Just development time. You know, and so what you know, weighing
priorities, which is the most important thing totally, but
yeah, with with you know, the vision for example, you know, if
if somebody sneaks up behind me and touches me, yeah, I would
know that and maybe the robot doesn't at this point might
being able to hear this. Yeah, exactly. Somebody is coming up
behind me. I can look back and be like, Oh, hey, what's going
on? And then you know, we can have a conversation so no, no
perceptions. As far as that's gotcha Audrow Nash: is just curious
with like interacting with little kids and stuff with like
the little kid with patted on the head and would know with
being pat on the head. Oh, yeah. But Jason Richards: people people
are hugging it all the time. Audrow Nash: Yeah. Okay, so the
neck. Tell me about the neck. So it how many degrees of freedom
does it have? What kind of things gonna do? Yeah. Jason Richards: So not wanting
again, not wanting to be super creepy. So we've limited the
range. Audrow Nash: So we can't go
around like, a hole or something. Jason Richards: Yeah, we don't
want this. It's Halloween. Yeah. Yeah, robot, right. Yeah,
exactly. So it's a limited a limited range view, just just
like a human would be. So it doesn't it will go back,
probably a little farther than a human would by itself. Turn my
neck, I can get about 90 degrees. But it doesn't go much
further than that. So we have we also do a full 180 either. And
so it's about it's about 150 degrees. So that's pretty harsh.
And, you know, basically looking over your shoulder, right, you
can look back and see what's going on. Yeah. And then And
then, you know, down basically similar to a human right, you
can sit down touch your head. And then the other problem is,
you know, looking, looking up, you've got the back of the the
head, Audrow Nash: right, the Yeah,
because the cameras are just underneath the chin, in a sense.
So it really does like to look up. Yeah, to clear the chin.
Right. Yep. Yeah, exactly. So, Jason Richards: yeah. So that's
it fully, fully articulating in all of the directions. Audrow Nash: That's two degrees
of freedom. Can it turn sideways? I think it probably
can. Right? Jason Richards: Yeah. Yeah.
Being able to kind of, yeah, tilt the head, like, one of our
Yeah, and that's one of the one of the most favorite ones that
we have, you know, especially when we're interacting with
kids, or they want to play with the robot. And so the robot
kinda like a dog, like, you know, caulk its head and look at
you funny. So that's one of the one of the things that we love
doing with people. Yeah. Like, and then, and then a couple
sounds that we put into the robot. So for them, they sound
in some of the videos, which is interesting. I mean, Pixar did a
wonderful job. So Audrow Nash: we'll leverage a
lot of their things. Jason Richards: Yeah,
absolutely. Yeah. But it's, it's pretty fun. One of the in its,
you know, with the sounds, people ask, you know, if it can
talk in, in some language, you know, English or whatever? And
the answer is, well, yeah, tech, technologically, that's pretty
simple to do. Yeah, but we've made a decision to not and
again, the reason for that is when you don't expect a dog to
talk back to you, you know, in in a language, but it will bark
and you can you can understand with with nonverbal
communication, what is going on. And so in the same way, as we,
you know, work with different robots in urban spaces, and they
would talk to you in English, it doesn't matter how nice the
robot is trying to say something in English. It comes across
route, you know, you don't expect a device to be telling
you to get out of the way, right. It's like, well, that's,
that's kind of, versus a robot that is just making sounds, you
know, more RTD to ask, then, than anything else, right? So
that you, you understand, like, Oh, this is asking me to move. I
was actually just having lunch today. It's at our local Mexican
restaurant, and we have a robot down there that's doing
deliveries all the time. And the robot had had come inside. And
then there was a cup in the way where it's supposed to park. And
so it's looking down there looking up looking around, you
know, its head like, hey, come over here and putting sounds and
then just somebody that was at the restaurant looked at it was
like, oh, it's trying to tell me something went over, take the
cup, got it out of the way. And then the robot was able to say
thank you turn around and back into its spot. So one of your
robots you're saying? Yeah, yeah, one of one of the ones
like this. Yeah. So So with Yeah, so it a nonverbal
communication, and that human robot interaction pieces, again,
a lot of stuff that we've we've studied. So it's where we put a
lot of time and effort into Audrow Nash: Yeah, it seems like
a thing of setting expectations. Because I think if something
talks, we expect that it can really talk. Right? And then
it's frustrating when it immediately doesn't recognize
you, like you could say any arbitrary complex thing, and it
would have no idea unless there's someone behind the
scenes like this. Jason Richards: Right? Yeah,
like a web chat. Yeah. You know, mean, typing, and you're like,
No, this is definitely this isn't a human Audrow Nash: talking. Yeah, the
robot would be similar to that. Otherwise, yeah, I've seen that
quite a bit from like different human robot interaction research
where they want to set the expectation low. So that they
can not over promise. Jason Richards: Right. And
obviously, you know, other companies have done a good job
of overcoming that barrier by having an actual human you know,
via like a computer screen on the other side. And then you're
talking face to face with a human right? The robot just
happens to be, you know, the carrier. It's the media of the
iPad, for sure. Yeah, exactly. Audrow Nash: So do you. So how
much of the robots control? Is a human in the loop? Like tele
operating the robot? And how much is autonomous? At this
point? Jason Richards: Yeah, at this
point, the, the autonomous piece is almost strictly for
navigation. So now that part's out of the way, one of the
things obviously, the the software guys, they're really
excited about the HDRI components automatically know
facial recognition, somebody happy, sad, how do I some
emotion or act? Yeah, yeah, putting them putting emotion.
But you know, while it's on the job, if you will, you know,
especially with disparity vision, and making sure that,
you know, collision detection and avoidance and things like
that is all working, it's going down a path to making sure it's
not going to run into something, but at the same time, it comes
into an obstacle, you know, it hits an obstacle, not hits an
obstacle, it sees an obstacle stops, and then can look around.
And it's kind of like, you know, looks like it's looking at
flowers or trees are cars that are passing by. So that, so that
is more natural than, you know, a robot that just drives you
know, gets to a point and then just kind of sits there for
Yeah, so. So all of the the human interaction pieces have
been with tele operating, you know, having somebody on the
other end, being able to emote, and it's been really fun to,
again, experiment in a pretty tight loop. So you can see what
do people react to? And what do they want? Like, what do they
want to see from this robot on a emotional or interaction basis?
And then once they have that, you know, now that we've had
that we have some really good data now, just programming
right? This program, like, okay, when this than this, yeah. And
then the robot can know what to do in certain situations. Audrow Nash: So when so the
robot will autonomously go from point A to point B. It does it
uses GPS or how to do that. Jason Richards: Yeah, GPS and,
and Dead Reckoning and dead reckoning. So, right? Yeah. So
within the tracks itself, it, it knows where it is less slippage,
like you'd say, you know, better better than Audrow Nash: does it use. Is it
doing? It's not generating? I think, in us talking a little
bit before the actual recording started. It doesn't do mapping,
right, you have to go map an area before the robot goes into
that area. Is it correct? Jason Richards: Yeah, for the
autonomous piece. Yeah. So when we go into a new area, yeah, we
go into a new area, we have, you know, an operator that's doing
that piece, you know, going through finding out where the
the obstacles are stuff like that. And so here's the road
crossings. Here's the dangerous battle. Yeah, don't go here. You
know, kind of like kinda like the Waze app, you know. So once
we have all that, all that set, then we can say, Yeah, this is a
this is a free and clear sidewalk, you can go, you know,
full speed. This is a danger zone slowdown. This is a road
crossing. We don't, we aren't, you know, there's a lot more
programming, we aren't letting the robot cross streets fine. So
yeah, Audrow Nash: that seems that
seems terrifying. For your robot. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. So what
is it when someone is going to create one of these maps for the
robot? What does it involve? Do they just like a handheld stereo
camera to do it like? Or do you just bring a lidar through it?
And it just maps everything? Or what like, how do you how do you
create this initial map? Jason Richards: Question, we
actually, we actually just do it with a robot to drive the robot
relocating. Mm hmm. Which does Audrow Nash: generate a big 3d
mouse that way, and then you annotate it. Jason Richards: Know where it's
a little more complex than that. I won't, I won't try to butcher
it. Because I'm not one of the engineers on the project. But
yeah, but being able to go through. And then with that,
being able to process all the data that we need, so we can
see, here's, here's what's going on. And it also does a lot of
good stuff. When we're doing bigger deployments. One of the
things that people really want from our customer base is Dax is
really cool. It's a really cool thing, right? It just happens to
be cute, and it delivers food. So you know, what it does is
kind of an accessory. So when we go to a new area, it brings a
lot of goodwill to the, you know, to the people that are
getting in as well. You know, we're driving a robot on every
path that we can think of, you know, for delivery area, and
people are stopping us all the time asking questions, this
robots like oh, we're partnering with this person and and so and
then also gives us some good information as well for the
other connectivity, you know, LTE and stuff like that. So when
operators have to jump in, we got to make sure that we have
what carrier do we need to use for the different agencies? What
bands right Yeah, cuz everywhere. Everyone's A bit
different. And so obviously, what will work in here in Oregon
is not necessarily the best carrier down in Coronado,
California, which is may not be the best carrier in Atlanta,
Georgia. Audrow Nash: Yeah. Gotcha. Okay,
yeah. So you have a map of the environment that you get from
driving the robot through it. And then you have the robot
navigate autonomously, from point A to point B using kind of
like, somewhat labeled map in some way where someone says,
this is a crosswalk, this is a sidewalk, these kinds of things,
then you get to your destination, and the robot is
taken over by someone who's controlling it with a
teleoperation setup to actually do the delivery to it. Correct? Jason Richards: Correct. Yeah.
So that at this point, knowing that, you know, that's the
interaction. It's not just the delivery service, right. It's,
it's the experience of having a robot that is being nice to you.
Yeah, so that's exactly that's where a human takes over and is
able to be interactive. Yeah. Audrow Nash: And so for that
part, what does it look like, for from the humans perspective?
Are they sitting on some sort of, like, video call kind of
thing that sees what the robot sees? And they have a bunch of
buttons in front of them? Where they can say nod head like this,
make this noise? Like this kind of thing for picking the
behaviors? Or how does it work? Jason Richards: Yeah, a little
more simple than that. A couple joysticks, you know, that have,
you know, a lot of lot of pre programs into the joysticks, you
know, kind of your over your overview map, you can kind of
see where the robots were at, you know, you can monitor
several robots at a time. You know, making sure they're
staying on path. And then if one needs help, you know, the
operator is able to go look into it and see what they need to do
navigate around or end of destination, right. Being able
to, to contact the person. Let them know that they're their
personal copy that's funny for the delivery, like Uber Eats or
DoorDash or something. Yeah, when you have to call them and
be like, where Audrow Nash: are you at? Yeah.
Yep. That's funny. So, okay. Let's see. So then, so they're
using a simple interface to control the robot while they're
doing that interaction. You were saying that eventually, maybe
you could automate this kind of thing? Or you or at least part
of the interaction now that you're generating data? How and
then do you have the customer like rate how enjoyable it was?
Or different metrics of it. So you can see how the interaction
was and what parts of it they liked and disliked and whatever? Jason Richards: Yeah, good
question. So we, so there's not like a Dax app? For example,
people aren't ordering food through Audrow Nash: us to get not Yeah,
actually. Jason Richards: Yeah. Well,
it's, it's, it's an interesting paradigm. We work with the
restaurant and so we'd rather do integration with people so that
it's their brand. We just happen to be the Korea robot that's
delivered. Yep. Yeah, kinda like, you know, I lived in
Seattle and Boeing, obviously the a great company. But, you
know, a Boeing airplane could have Alaska Airlines on the
side, or it could have delta or United or whomever, right. So.
So when I go to get on my plane, I'm not saying hey, I'm on a but
am I on a Boeing? I'm no, I'm, I'm with delta this time, or
Alaska or whomever? Right? So yeah, it's kind of the same, you
know, kind of feel. But, but with that, yeah, so especially
here in our local town, it's a small town. And so being able
to, you know, we've got their phone number, and then we can
ask, you know, direct conversations, and see what
people like and don't like we we did a test at a retirement
community as well. I mean, the assumptions that we had were
kids, we know kids like robots, which I think back to when I was
a little kid, and I've got a I've got a eight year old and a
two year old, and to them growing up. Oh, yeah. Robots
around the street. Like it's just kind of a normal thing,
right? Yeah. But so I'd imagine kids probably are good with it.
And they do they love Dax, people, our age are, are a lot
more amenable to Dax as well, because it's cool technology. So
we didn't know how it was going to be received with people in
their 90s and, shockingly, Dax were all for overseas. Yeah. Oh,
yeah. Again, because it's not it's not a machine to them. It's
it's an entity. Right? So when you watch Star Wars, for
example, are 2d to into machine. He is but you don't perceive
him? Yeah, you see, you perceive him as an as an entity, you
know, somebody that you are having conversation with, not
just, you know, directing to do a thing so so in the same way
when people see Dax, you know, and it's funny, I do the same
thing. I know what's behind you know, I know you know, all the
inner workings of the robot, but I'll see him on the street while
I'm, you know, going to get a taco. And I'm like, Hey, Dad,
I'll say hi. And it's so funny. And obviously I know you know,
it, doesn't it You know, I'm saying but it's, it's definitely
an experience until somebody experiences or sees the
difference between, you know, just you know, a cart that can
deliver something to you versus having an interaction with a
beam. That is a machine. It's starkly different. Audrow Nash: Now. So you guys
are deploying in your, in your town. So you're in Portland,
right? I haven't been to No, Jason Richards: not poor. Oh,
where are you? Yeah, not Portland. We're. So Oregon State
University Corvallis, which is about an hour and a half south.
And we actually are in a small suburb of that in a little town
called fellowmen. But yeah, so not Portland. Not Not a huge
Metro. Audrow Nash: But yeah, small
town. How many people to the town? Oh, about 5000. Wow. So Jason Richards: small. It's
crazy. Small town. Yeah. Small town. I moved down here from
Seattle. It's a big change. It was it was good. Yeah. Yeah. I
grew up in it. I grew up in Montana personally. So it wasn't
changed to go back. Yeah. Back to a small town. Right. Yeah,
we've got robots now that are in Coronado, doing food delivery.
Down there. That's been fun. We got some robots that are
shipping out to Georgia. Cool. We next week Expo Hell yeah. So
we're getting packaged up and shipped to Georgia. And then
different deployments. I think Long Beach. We've got some
robots in Long Beach right now. Yeah. Deliver stuff. And then.
Yeah, and more people are contacting us all the time. Oh,
yeah. Yeah, Audrow Nash: how many? How many
robots are deployed? Right now? Would you estimate? Jason Richards: What really, I
could probably do the math in my head. It's not a lot. So we've
got the deployment in Coronado, Long Beach, Audrow Nash: we definitely use
it on the order. Georgia, or is it on the order of like, Jason Richards: yeah, that's
about it's about, we've got, you know, got more robots in that
that are coming off the production line, but we've got
actually in the field working. We've got about Audrow Nash: about 10 Yeah, 910.
Gotcha. They're doing stuff. Okay. Interesting. How large are
you guys as a company? Like how many people are involved? Jason Richards: Yeah, so we've
got there's a 18 of us, Hey, we've got the manufacturing. So
we got the manufacturing side. That is, you know, getting
robots, you know, off the line, then obviously, the operation
side and servicing, you know, like, getting data on that, you
know, how long do you have to run a robot before the tread
needs to get replaced? Yeah. How many miles on their tires, you Audrow Nash: know, imagine where
you were out fairly fast, too, which is interesting, Jason Richards: surprisingly,
not really, actually have lasted a long time, we finally we
finally got one that we're like, Hey, this looks like it's
certain to how many were out. We should swap this out. I don't
actually this actually just happened. I think it was either
earlier this week or late last week. And so I asked her
Operations Manager, like figure out how many hours we put on
this. Yeah, we can put that in our service manual. But yeah.
And then obviously, they the engineering team, you know,
mechanical and electrical and software and firmware, and yeah,
so Yeah. Audrow Nash: Gotcha. Cool. And
how are you guys funded? For this kind of thing? Have you
been accepting investment? Or like, what kind of where are you
at in terms of funding? Jason Richards: It's good
question. So um, so in 2002, brothers, I'll tell you the
story of the founder. So two brothers, they started an
internet an ISP. dead broke. I mean, they, they were volunteer
firefighters lived at the fire station and paid themselves $50
A week, a month kind of thing, you know, crazy. barely getting
by got it got it up and running. And then in 2011, or so kind of
limping along there. Since they were firefighters. One of the
brothers had this idea because they went to a fire call, they
got to the fire station. And the fire trucks were coming back
from the call, by the time they got there. He's like, this is
stupid. Like, we have the iPhone. I'm gonna build, I'm
gonna build an app. And so he built this app called active
911. And last I heard it's about 40% of firefighters in North
America use this app called active. Wow. So it's done very,
very well. And by his that Joseph and Joseph goal was
always to have this r&d lab that I talked about. So in 2015, they
started Novo dynamics. And then Dax was kind of the first big
project that they said, Okay, five years from now, I think
robots doing delivery is going to be a thing. So let's start
working towards that end, and more importantly, working
towards the future that people want to see, you know, when, you
know, again, when people are thinking the future of electric
cars, electric cars have been around, you know, since the 80s.
Yeah, you know, long people have tried to do electric cars. But
it wasn't until Tesla before now, it's something that people
want, right? People are like, Oh, that's the vision of the
future that we want to see not these weird box things that are
glorified golf carts. Yeah, right. So in the same way, you
know, with the robot is solving that, you know, what kind of
thing do we want in pedestrian spaces? That isn't going to be
creepy, that people are going to want to attack themselves to
they can do helpful things for people. So that was that was the
idea. So the r&d portion is all been self funded, you know,
because these other two companies that have done well,
it's been self funded up until about a month ago. And so about
a month ago, I was actually, you know, January when we said, we
need to, we need to commercialize this thing, what
do we need to do we need to get investment. Because, you know,
building you know, 20 robots is one thing, building a fleet of
them. Hundreds is a totally different ballgame. So. So it's
actually just about a month ago that we opened up a crowd,
crowdfunding campaign through start engine, which is the
intermediary, so so it's kicked off. And this first time I've,
you know, I've been involved in lots of companies started a
couple myself, but I've never gone after investors. So it's a
whole new experience for me. You mean crowdfunding specifically?
Or? Or even venture capital? You know, filing with the SEC? Yeah.
Never. I've always been bootstrapped. Yep. Right. We've
always bootstrapped company. So this is the first time going
after investors. And it's really interesting, because the the
majority of people that don't know us, you know, they don't
know who we are. And they don't understand that, that the two
brothers like, people that know the two brothers, a lot of
people that know them have invested quite a bit because
they paid another venture. Yeah. Yeah. And yeah, and they, they
seen the robot, obviously, our hometown, couldn't ask for a
better reception, you know, from the investing standpoint,
because they're like, No, this is our robot. This is our
hometown, and, you know, friendly neighborhood robot that
we're investing in. But people that don't know us, that have
invested. You know, we're saying over $1,000, you know, $1,000 or
more, yeah, I've been reaching out to those people. And
predominantly, they're engineers, you know, it's people
that, that see what we're doing. And they say, Oh, this is cool.
Like, this is a cool version or vision of the future that you
guys have. And we want to be a part of that. So yeah, so that's
where learning, you know, how do we how do we get that message
out to more people? So not just engineers, but everyone that's
it seems to be? It seems to be interesting that that's the
community that is really liking what we're doing. Audrow Nash: So yeah, well,
they're interested. I don't know, as an engineer, I'm
interested in robots. And I imagine it's true for a lot of
other engineers. Jason Richards: It's true
anyway. And it's not just you know, robotics into you know,
every discipline you can imagine civil engineers are like, wow,
this is. So it's kind of cool. Audrow Nash: So, how was the
crowdfunding? What are your thoughts on crowdfunding after?
So is it still alive? Or yeah, it's still alive. So at the time
of this interview, it is how long will it stay live until?
Because it may be I said, it'll be like three weeks before this
is published. So Jason Richards: yeah, so the
the, the raise is going through either you hit the the first
goal that, you know, we can hit with what we filed with the SEC.
So we're looking for a million dollars by the end of the year
is kind of the the goal and the target that we have, we're about
a third of the way there, you know, after been going for about
a month, so it will either will either hit that that mark, and
the fund will shut off, or I believe it goes until I think
it's a six month campaign. So it would go until until April of
next year. Audrow Nash: Oh, hell yeah.
Okay, good. So this episode will air while it is still going if
it goes to the six month time. Awesome. Yeah. What have you
thought of crowdfunding? It's an interesting model. Does each
person get some equity? Or they're just supporting you? Or
they like get a tax robot? Or how does it work? Jason Richards: Yeah, so there,
yeah, there are different ways of crowdfunding? Yes. You know,
we're a nonprofit or something, it's not equity, what we're
doing is actually is actually equity. So you're actually
getting stuck in the company, which is, is kind of cool. So
I've heard horror stories of that, Audrow Nash: where you have
funding crowdfunding, where you give them equity, because like,
you'll have to go and get permission from everyone for all
the decisions and eventually, just like veure bureaucracy
weighs down the company no longer gets anywhere. That I
guess you have clear about their terms kind of thing, if you
guess. Jason Richards: Yeah, and
everybody so yeah, start engine is the platform that we're
using. And part of it is that yes, you do get common, you
know, common stock, you know, which is you have shares in the
company. But you also are essentially signing over your
vote to the CEO, which is me. So, so when anybody says yes,
you know, I'm going to put $1,000 into DAX and get, you
know, however many shares they're also saying that that,
okay, I know that you run minority shareholder, yep.
Right. So I am your representative. So I am the vote
for the shareholder. So obviously, if people want to
talk to me, obviously and let their voice be heard, you know,
kind of like a representative government, you know, cool and
Okay, I like that a good way better talk to me. Yeah. And
then same thing where it's exactly cuz otherwise, you know,
your shareholders meetings. Everybody's there by proxy, and
I'm the proxy and I'm the boat so, so it doesn't really bog us
down administrate If that makes sense, yes, the cap table is, is
big. And usually people that don't understand technology very
well and the liberalization, Audrow Nash: which is where the
monopolization goes, right? Like or who owns what? That's
typically correct, Jason Richards: right, right.
Yeah. Who owns what? Yeah. So if you buy, you know, 50 shares in
index bought, your name goes on the list of like, okay, you are
an investor. So Oh, yeah. Audrow Nash: Okay. That's crazy.
Yeah, that's, I will at least we have like, you can automate
everything. So you don't really have to do too much. Probably. Jason Richards: No, that's,
that's all gonna say, yeah, there's not and and people that
don't know technology very well, they have in their mind that
you're looking, you know, that many stamps, you know,
envelopes, as you're sending out like, requests, you know, to
shareholders and things like that, like, No, you put it in a
CSV file, and boom, everybody gets a mailer. Audrow Nash: So how, how much?
How much? So you said, your goal is a million, you're a third of
the way there, it's been a month, you have five more months
or so? How many, so in that third of a million dollars,
which you've collected? How many people are involved in that? Jason Richards: A little A
little over 200. So, Audrow Nash: okay, so it's
mostly like at least investing, at least investing like 1500 per
person, on average kind of thing. Jason Richards: That's, that's
the average. And we had to, we had to have a minimum that was
above 100. And so what we wanted to do, and back back to the
large cap table, right, the number of people that would be
on this, this list of investors, people were saying, you know,
don't make it too big, but at the same time, we have a lot of
fans. We call it the DAX fam. You know, and we wanted, we
wanted people to be a part. And so we said, Okay, we need to
have a minimum, that minimum entries 170 bucks, so that
people can be, you know, an owner of DAX but why Audrow Nash: is that arbitrary? Jason Richards: Weaver? Audrow Nash: Why $170? Jason Richards: Yeah, so we I
like round numbers personally. And so our, it's 169 50. And so
our with our current valuation and what the stock price is, and
ends up being 50 shares, we have to we had to have a number over
$100. Okay, and so we said, Okay, well, then 50 shares, so
50 shares is 169 5339 shares. Oh, I see. Okay, so that's how
it works out simple. Yeah. So I just made it that was it was
arbitrary, but it was a, okay, I have 50 shares of dexpot. Right,
that became kind of the lowest investment that you could do,
and then up to to answer your question. So up to $50,000 is,
is, you know, 50,000. and above, if somebody wants to invest at
that level, we said, yeah, we'll fly back to your location, and
we'll have them deliver something to you. Cool. So we
have nobody's, nobody's taking us up on the 50,000 yet, but
we've had had a few investments that invested down, you know,
several $1,000. And the average is about 1500. But I think
there's a lot of investors, the majority of the investors, if
you will, are about $1,000, guys, so it's been a good
reception. And because it's I don't know if I know this
correctly, but this is my impression, and you can correct
me, because it's relatively small amounts of money that
people are investing. They don't have to meet the bar, the people
investing don't have to meet the bar for Audrow Nash: being like an angel
investor or something, which I think is like a million in
assets or assets or something, and over some amount per year.
So anyone can invest in this kind of thing. Jason Richards: Yep, exactly.
And, and that was a law. And I might get it wrong. But it was,
you know, fairly recently, I think, when 10 years or maybe 15
years when the law came out. Before that. You're right.
Everything was an accredited investor, which, like you said,
massive amounts of either high income, high disposable income
or huge net worth that is in your house. Yeah. And so it's
very, very rare air to be an angel. Yeah, exactly. And so, so
with that, they said, okay, there are some rules around it.
So for example, if you go to start engine, and you say I want
to be an investor, they will ask you some questions about your
income and things like to confirm because there are
limits. Okay. Yeah. And to make sure that, that if you don't
have a lot of disposable income, you're not doing it going to
hurt yourself. Right. That's good. Exactly. So yeah, and
there are certain limits and things again, depending on
income and assets and things like that, so it doesn't hurt
anybody, but at the same time people can invest in in cool
startups like this totally. And it's kind of Audrow Nash: early to, yeah,
yeah, Jason Richards: absolutely. So
they can say oh, you know, people a lot of people like I
don't want to put my people that are okay putting money into
crypto are usually okay putting money into, into into startups,
right? They you know, it's not people they just want bonds,
right? Yeah, I don't want bonds and put it in that row massively
and I want to be something cool. So exactly. I get it more risk.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So and again, it's not you know, for a lot of
people you know, $1,000 is not like a it's Yeah, doesn't
exactly doesn't break the bank but if it if it goes big like
that, pool. And again, it's again more a part of a, you
know, I've met people that invested in Microsoft when it
was nothing, you know, kind of thing. And it's like, yeah, wow,
you're probably enjoying that. Audrow Nash: So, so one thing
that I would be curious about if I was to invest in this is about
future rounds of funding, because it might be possible
that they get diluted through additional funding. How does
that look for like, yeah, just talk about that, because I don't
know too much about it. Jason Richards: Absolutely.
Yeah. I didn't either, you know, till a few months ago, when I
really had to learn a lot. So the way that it works is that
the goal when you go to each investment round is to the value
of the company wants to go up, right? That's, that's the goal.
So if the value of the company goes up, so does the amount of
dollars you know, easy math, if you invested $5, and then the
company, the value of the company doubles, then your $5
turns into $10. Right? Just, you know, hypothetically, yeah.
Okay, value goes up. But then right, then you say, Okay, we're
gonna go after other investors. So we're gonna add more shares
to this. Yeah, well, exactly. It's just gonna dilute your
shares, right. So your your share was $5. Now, it's $10.
Because we doubled it, but now we've put more shares in the
mix. So now my shares are worth eight. But it allows it allows
more fuel for more growth, if that makes sense. Yeah. And the
hope is that it grows again. So then that eight turns into 16.
And the company doubled again, right? So that's, that's
essentially how that works. And that's a very simple, very, very
soon. Yeah, but Audrow Nash: the dynamic, is
there. Yeah. And you just hope that it's not diluted to such an
extent that you make quite a bit at the end. If a company does
have some sort of liquidation event? Jason Richards: Yep. Yep. And
that's the goal. And I've, you know, talking to venture
capitalists and angels, and just kind of getting a sense for what
what are you looking for, you know, what is what does an angel
investor or a venture capitalist looking for? Audrow Nash: What do they think? Jason Richards: Most? Yeah. Most
of Audrow Nash: them Jason Richards: have no
experience with at least the ones that I know. I've talked to
most of them have no experience with it, because they haven't
had to write they they're that rare air of angel investors
accredited investors. So are they don't need to have an
investment firm or something. Exactly. This kind of Yep.
throwing around the money. A lot of people. Yeah. And since
again, because it's a fairly new concept in the scope of, you
know, the history of the world, it's a fairly new thing that you
can get into these crowdfunding rounds. They don't have a whole
lot of experience with it, but a lot of them, it seems that the
tides are turning a little bit. I'll give an example. So there's
a, an angel group are called the Oregon rain. And it's more for
small, small, small startups. You know, like, you know, I need
$30,000 to get this, this idea off the ground. Yeah. And so
because they're angels, and trying to figure out how they're
going to do it, they actually partnered with another
intermediary, I can't remember, but basically who it was, but
essentially, this other intermediary, like start engine
was going to give them a white label version of what does it
mean, programmable? That version? I don't know. Yeah. So
yeah, so a white label version would be. So for example, if I
have a software, let's call it Microsoft Office or Microsoft
Word, right? So a total a white liberal version amendment. Audrow Nash: Yeah. Jason Richards: Okay, so I can't
just I can't just say, hey, it's Microsoft Word. Yeah. But if I
had a white label version, if you came to me and said, I'm
going to give you you know, $300 billion. So I have a white
labeled version. It's not Microsoft Word anymore. It's now
dexpot word, right? And so I the label, or you buy, essentially,
okay, you buy it, you buy the rights of the software, but they
put your name on it. And so that's so a white middle version
of startengine would be, you know, Oregon rain.com/investors.
But the actual software was not written by Oh, yes. Investors,
okay, by another company. Yeah, that makes sense. So, so, so I,
it looks like it's becoming more. There's more awareness
around crowd fund so that in these angel groups seems like, Audrow Nash: okay, that's what
you were. So I was a bit lost for a sec. You were saying
basically, that's an example of crowdfunding going into
something that is a bit larger. Yes. With investors or
something? Jason Richards: Right. Yeah. The
angels. They are they know of it, but they haven't
participated. But it seems to be just the research that I've been
doing, it seems to be that they're more open and receptive
to it. Interesting, more, because you have companies that
have gone through crowdfunding rounds, and they've they've done
they've done it successfully, meaning that they, they got the
money, and then they executed on the goal correctly. They started
getting revenues. And now they have revenue. So now they could
go into like an angel investment group or venture capitalists and
say, here's our revenues. And here's the funding that we got
before. Now, would you you know, invest in this and there Now
seeing because they're seeing this happening more often,
they're more privy to the fact that, oh, we might want to look
into investing in crowdfunding options ourselves. Audrow Nash: Why would so why
would a company go into crowdfunding as opposed to
seeking investment from, I don't know, like a, like a pre seed or
some sort of company or some sort of angel investor or
something like this, because I understand that one of the
benefits of having investors come together for your company
is that they can help you make while they can connect you to
the right people, or they can mentor you. So you avoid
potholes. Why would you choose crowdfunding over a specific
like one larger investor? Kind of thing? Jason Richards: Yeah. Yeah, to
two main reasons. So January, then back January of this year,
when we were looking at going after investment, reached out to
some venture capitalists and friends of friends that we have,
but no people. And essentially all of them said, Okay, well,
what are your revenues? Zero. Okay, so if your revenues are
zero, that's a pretty big gamble. Right? You're for them.
That's the perception market event Audrow Nash: or these kinds of
things. So neurons, Jason Richards: okay. Yeah.
Yeah. So I did at this point, they would look at that and say,
Oh, it looks like it's still like a research phase. It's
like, Yeah, but we want to go from a research phase into a
commercialized phase. So in order to make that jump, it's
going to require money. And so I was talking to one, one venture
capitalist who he been on the other side of the table to write
he had he had startups gone after venture capital and had
some successful exits. And, and he said, he said, what you're
going after right now is he called it dumb money, for that
reason, right? Because when you go after venture capitalists,
you're not only you're getting their Rolodex, right, the old
Rolodex is where people had contacts and things like that.
So you're going after their Rolodex as much as you are on
the cash. And so that's kind of the next step that I see. Audrow Nash: And also just
advising to not just rollback, but like they can really no,
because they could have could have seen people go through
similar stages. And they can be like, Ah, this Yep, like, at
this point, you should be working on this. And at this
point, you do this, and this is how we get to the next stage,
our Series A or whatever it might be. Jason Richards: Yep. So yeah. So
with with the, so as we talked to different people,
essentially, it was, you know, that was kind of the feedback we
got from several, the, you know, get some revenue didn't come
back to us kind of thing. So we looked at that and said, Okay,
well, then crowdfunding seems like, a good option for a few
reasons. One was because we everywhere DAX goes a celebrity.
You know, everybody, kind of everybody, there's, about half
of the people will kind of walk by like, oh, yeah, I see robots
trying to talk to me every day, you know, like, and I might say,
I'm trying to Audrow Nash: go, where is this?
I don't know. I feel like I should be in the area with all
the robots. And you were mentioning that it's not legal
for robots to drive on the streets here. But I'm in I'm
supposed to be in the tech area. And I so seldom see robots
anywhere doing anything. Work From Home stuff, but yes. Okay. Jason Richards: Right. And then
and then the other half of people are, you know, getting
out of their cart. We haven't caused any, you know, auto
accidents from people like rubbernecking, but it is fun
being you know, walking. It's fun walking behind dact. Yep.
And seeing people on the road because people will look and
even if they're having a bad day, it's funny watching the
people in the car because they will, they will turn their head
look at the robot. And you know, the look at DAX and then
everybody smiles. Where has this look of like astonishment? Yeah,
what is that? Did I just see that? But everybody smiles like,
well, that is that's cool. You know, like, huh, I just saw
something special today. So anywhere, the DAX goes. He's a
celebrity. Like I talked about, you know, the hometown film, if
we wanted to be able to say, hey, you can invest to for
crowdfunding. So yeah, like, give you that opportunity. The
other piece of crowdfunding is it's a lot of, it's a lot of
marketing. Right? Film is, is a, it's a great little small town.
But it's a small town. Down here for me. Yeah, versus Seattle.
And you got 4 million, you know, not as big as you know, LA where
you're coming from but, but need more eyeballs on DAX, right,
more the more eyeballs, the C DAX, the more people that have
invested interest literally, right? If somebody is in Texas,
and they put $1,000 into DAX, they're probably also more privy
to be like, hey, I want DAX down here, too, you know, or what
connections do you have any larger sense? That makes sense?
So those were the two big reasons that we said yeah, let's
let's go after crowdfunding and make it work. Audrow Nash: So what do you
think? So I coming from, so I was in grad school doing human
robot interaction for a little bit. Oh, yeah. And one of the
things that was very concerning for the community was kind of
the this novelty effect. So like someone can be, like really
excited about the robot, and they'll like, do all the things
the robot wants and behave really well around it. But then
over time, so as weeks go by, and months go by any, like,
maybe the robot becomes less influential on those people,
because they now are like, I know what it does. I'm kind of
sick of it. This kind of thing. Yeah. Any any thoughts on this?
Because the robot is currently a celebrity. But I wonder, could
it be a novelty effect? Or is it? How do you think of these
things? Jason Richards: Yeah. So if if
all the DAX did was be novel? I would agree with that. Right. So
differing things and so right. So do you have to have a useful
function as well? Right. So if he's, if it is, same with you
know, like, I would say that, that if it's doing useful things
for people, whether it's, you know, delivering you food or,
you know, patrolling grounds, like a security robot or
something like that, right, if it's doing something useful,
it's not only novel and cool. You wouldn't get sick, because
it's actually helping. It's justifying it feels way. Yeah,
exactly. Especially in the delivery space, because
delivery. You know, if you look back to the 1970s, when they
started tracking it, called the labor force participation rate.
And so the US government tracking, it was like, US
government. Yeah. Department of Labor. Okay. Yeah. The
Department of Labor is looking at how many people are working
compared to the population, and that that number has been in
steady decline since the 70s. COVID exasperated that. Yeah.
But you know, where was less people working in at the same
time? If you look at just food delivery service, in general,
that's been on an increased, you know, exponential growth path
for the last several years. COVID exasperated that as well.
So the restaurants and the people that we talked to in the
delivery space, it's almost an expectation. Now, you know,
where, what if you own a restaurant delivery, you really
want a restaurant? Yeah, exactly, exactly. You might not,
but Uber Eats or GrubHub or DoorDash, or somebody is going
to deliver this food to me, right? It's kind of the
expectation. Yep. And so that's, maybe I don't want to say an
unrealistic expectation. But when you don't have enough
people to fill those roles, it's just not going to happen. So for
example, in Coronado, one of our guys walked into one of the
restaurants in the back and they said, do you see all those
orders, and there's like 20 delivery orders sitting there,
like they, they've been sitting for hours, and there's nobody
going to come pick them up, like very doubtful that somebody is
actually going to get on UberEATS or GrubHub, or
wherever, and go and pick those orders up and take them to the
people that want them. You know, last delivery experience I had,
when I was on a trip to Montana, is we had delivery set for 1130.
For lunch for there's only five of us in the room. So okay,
lunch is gonna be here at 1130. We we ordered it ahead of time,
make sure we got into delivery schedule, and it didn't show up
till 2pm. And that's just because of you know, there's not
enough people to fill those types of roles. Is that Audrow Nash: a thing that's more
particular to small towns, do you think like basically, is the
whole like, say, middle of America that would have smaller
towns? or basically any, because I'm thinking of like, I'm in San
Francisco now. And generally, it seems like the food delivery
services are quite quick. But maybe this is so it hasn't been
in my experience, as you've described, where there's like,
20 orders for this kind of thing. Is this particular 20
locations, I guess, or any types of sounds or types of towns? Jason Richards: Yeah, that's a
good question. So Coronado, California isn't isn't exactly
like, you know. Yeah, yeah. It's right outside San Diego. But
it's right outside San Diego, right, you got to go over the
bridge. So it's also very wealthy zip code. And so if you
are living in Coronado, you're probably not the person doing
the live delivery. So people have to come in, and then do the
delivery within that, that area. So, so that's kind of unique
thing. The other thing is that a lot of people, you know, door
Dashers and people that do GrubHub and UberEATS, and stuff
like that. A lot of them don't want to do the short, the short
stuff. Yes. Similar to like, your Uber driver wants to drive
you 30 miles away to an airport, they don't want to drive you
three blocks, right? Because they set Audrow Nash: up for but in
general, some of them are trying to generate trips and these
kinds of things. Jason Richards: Right, yeah. But
in general, you know, you're you're making more, if you will,
you know, the longer you have. Yeah, you're doing the long
trips. So so same way you know, for robot you know, this you
know, the DAX is not DAX is not optimized to go 30 miles you
know, he's he's got a pretty good like, one, one and a half
mile range. And those are that's a good niche to fill. Audrow Nash: Mm hmm. Okay, could
you Imagine pairing with vehicles and things where this
are like kind of like the package delivery idea where it'd
be an autonomous car that drives the robot and the robot does the
last little bit of the delivery. Could you imagine that being
used in that kind of thing? Jason Richards: I could. It
would be it would definitely be interesting. Obviously, there's
a lot of people that are working towards those types of
solutions. Yeah. Audrow Nash: Even in the Oregon
area to thinking of agility robotics, I believe. Yeah,
they're trying to do the legendary Jason Richards: robotics thing.
They're just up the road from us. So Oh, cool. Yeah. Yeah.
Hello, Audrow Nash: litres of package
delivery, or whatever? Is that? Yeah. Jason Richards: Yeah. And it's a
very interesting it, you know, that, you know, last mile
delivery is always the most expensive, you know, you look at
logistics in general. That's, that's the hard stuff to figure
out. Yeah. So very potentially, there's a lot of, obviously, a
lot more that has to go into the logistics of that loading and
unloading a robot moving parts. Audrow Nash: You need, like a
little lowering platform or something to get the robot Jason Richards: down there.
Yeah. And we've got a band that we, you know, haul robots in.
And we have that, but it from from a large scale, you know,
like if you're a big Logistics Center, like Amazon, or UPS or
something like that, right. It's a lot of moving parts there. And
so sure, eventually, I could see something like that, like an
Amazon locker, you know, that that drives to a town, but then
every locker opens up and becomes a little robot and
drives to your doorstep. You know, it'd be super cool. Yeah.
You know, there's, there's probably something there. But
there's a lot of not just not just, you know, technological
hurdles to overcome, but a lot of like legislative hurdles to
overcome as well. Audrow Nash: Which I do want to
talk about for sure. Yeah, legislative things are very
interesting. But just before we do talk about that, when so
you're not generating revenue yet? I believe, right. Jason Richards: We are we are
now you're just doing the stages. Yep. Gotcha. Audrow Nash: I'm just wondering,
What will your business model be? Or what is it now? Yeah, for
generating revenue? And maybe you'll flip it around a bit. But Jason Richards: yeah, um, so
the, the thing that we have right now is kind of twofold.
One is that we realize kind of a back to the DAX as a celebrity
thing. We can talk about it now, there's been a few events that
the DAX has been in. One was for a TV show called the coma FD. So
there was a bunch of DAX robots that they turned into
firefighters and and get a bunch of promotion for a season or get
one with or under. Yeah, exactly. Right. He was an avid
he's like, my two worlds collided, this is amazing. And
then, and then one was for a Jack, Jack Daniels. It was some
some beverage company. And we did a delivery promotional event
at a golf course in Napa Valley. Things like so. Yeah. So
different marketing agencies are reaching out to us because it's
a unique, it's unique enough, right. It's novelty enough at
this point, that it's a great marketing engine for them. So so
being able to do appearances and stuff has been fun. And
obviously, it gets our brand out there as well. So that's fun.
That's that's been generating some revenue. The the flash
entertainment robot, yeah, right, exactly. But those are,
those are gig events, if you will, right. It's not recurring
revenue. So but the the actual business model is revolving
around that you have different deployments in different states
that are, you know, renting robots for, you know, 1000s of
dollars a month for robot, and they're gonna do deliveries a
service for you, which also keeps it so that we can take
care of service and those types of things. And then those that's
the monthly recurring model that we want to spin up. So Gotcha. Audrow Nash: So it's been where
they buy the hardware, or where they rent the hardware. They Jason Richards: rent the
hardware, correct? Yeah, yeah. They're renting the service of
delivery. And we happen instead of us being humans there. We
have robots that do it for Audrow Nash: us. Gotcha. So I
just recently, at the time of recording this interviewed
cobalt robotics, and they're doing something very similar for
security guard robots, where they're having the robots
basically be the legs and then they have someone controlling it
at a very high level. And so to me, this is kind of similar to
what you guys are doing, where it's you will have the robot be
autonomous on the navigation and then you'll have a person
control the robot for the interaction for the delivery. Is
that Is that what you imagine? Yeah, Jason Richards: that's yeah, I
imagine that that more and more pieces of that puzzle will get
solved, you know, autonomously. Yeah, again, like the facial
recognition pieces. Are you happy sad how do we make your
day if you're a kid, what do we do you know, you know, those
those types of things. But then say what the delivery piece you
know, being able to get to an end destination, and then
somebody comes out you realize that There's a person now in
front of you, you can interact with that person. And then open
your drawer if you know, you can see the code is correct, you
know, those those types of things can all be young
automatable. And that's the next pieces. Audrow Nash: Gotcha. So the goal
is full autonomy as much as possible. I'm just wondering,
yeah, if you would have a, like, I don't know. So in cobalt, they
have, like, half of the people there are just watching over the
security guards. They're the people that take over autonomy.
And I would wonder if at least before all this stuff is
automated, would you have some sort of similar model where
it's, you have a bunch of people working to do the autonomy, or
do to supplement the autonomy. So when it can get there? Jason Richards: Yeah. In you're
exactly right. It's more of the and that's what we tell people,
it's semi autonomy, because when people think autonomy, they
think, full on this robot is our duty to and it does exactly what
I want, whenever I want. But no, the semi autonomy piece is being
able to increase the number of you know, the ratio of operators
to actual robots that they oversee. Right. And that's the
goal is to have greater and greater autonomy, which requires
fewer and fewer operators, that aren't necessarily interacting
with every single person that they see. But making sure that
robots are, are generally staying in line with what they
need to be doing. Yeah, you know, or if they see something
that's completely, you know, a tree falls in the middle of
their path. And now they have no way around, because we're not
letting it go outside the bounds of you know, it's on a sidewalk,
it's like, we can't go into the road. You know, so not very nice
to take over and make a human decision of okay, we're gonna
have to find another path, right, turn the robot around,
but that kind of thing. So. So there will always be an
overseer, you know, somebody that's commanding, you know, a
crew of 20 or so robots. So Audrow Nash: cool. And how did
you decide to do the subscription model as opposed to
like, they buy the robot, and they're on their own, or they
buy the robot and you like, manage it somehow? Or they buy
it? And then they are a subscription thing? Or like all
these permutations? How did you pick the one? Jason Richards: So the current
one, investors really like MRR monthly recurring revenue, they
like seeing that this is going to come in whether you, you
know, yeah, essentially all the time. Right, versus fairly
predictable. Exactly. And that that really rings true for a lot
of investors. So that's one. The second is, is that when people
have asked us to buy the robot outright, we've kind of played
with the idea. But at the same time, we said, Okay, well, we're
gonna have to come up with some sort of service contract on top
of this. Because, you know, you could take a, it's not
ubiquitous enough, where you could take a laptop to a
computer repair shop, and they could probably figure out what
to do or diagnose it. You take a robot that nobody's seen before,
to like, you know, yeah, a computer repair shop, they're
not gonna know what to do. And so at the same time, we said, it
wouldn't, it doesn't make a lot of sense, because we did come up
with a model and said, Yeah, well, you can buy the robot for,
I don't remember what the number was, like 30 or $40,000. And
then it's still going to be a, you know, a fiver $1,000 monthly
service contract to have that robot. So we said, you know, if
we're, we have to go that model anyway. And explaining that to
people, they understand that they're like, oh, yeah, because
if a track falls off, or you know, a tread wears out, or
whatever, you know, yeah, you need to get to the restaurant to
repair that. Exactly. Yeah. And so, so having a service model
made a lot more sense. Yeah. To, to us, and to people that have
been talking to so Audrow Nash: yeah. Let's see, I
have a few questions that I want to ask all at the same time. But
what? So you're doing things where it's like, they're in
Atlanta, they're in California, they're in Oregon? Does it mean
you're going to have to set up technicians at all these
locations so that they can do these repairs? Or how the kind
of the logistics of that work? Jason Richards: Yeah, so it's,
um, we actually what we do is we actually find partners in those
areas, that we can then train on some minor stuff, you know,
usually it's, you know, computer repair shops, or people that are
in, you know, manufacturing, robotics type hardware, maybe
not robotics itself, but you know, something that they see a
circuit board and they don't freak out, you know, they it's
not like taking into a bicycle repair shop. Right? Yeah. So
somebody that has some experience with technology, so
we partnered with them, and then then become essentially our
point of contact for shipping, you know, robots in and out of a
city. And then we also we keep a hot spare that's readily
available inside swab. I see. Correct. So if the robot has a
problem, something happens. That yeah, we can we can within the
day, swap the robot out with a new robot ready to go. If it's
simple enough that we can repair with remote hands. We'll have
them do that on a surface contact. If it's more complex
than that, you know, the one that was there's a hot spare in
the crate. We saved throw this one in the crate we got another
one coming your way we ship a robot and they robots basically
meet, you know, somewhere in the middle of America. So Audrow Nash: somebody then The
next thing I don't know if I'm correct on this, but I imagine
that food delivery is a fairly low margin industry, which means
you need a lot of volume. Because and I think this and I'm
not I don't have data and I'm not really aware. But I don't
think that the like Uber Eats drivers are paid that well, or
any of the any of the delivery services. And so I think it's
more about like, How many can you get? Does this and I'm
wondering basically, for how long before the robot would like
pay off its existence, and start being profitable to the
companies in this kind of thing? If it is a low margin thing?
Because they have to make a lot of deliveries? Probably, yeah.
This kind of thing? Yeah, Jason Richards: it really
depends. So a good example of this would be one of the people
that is getting the service down in the Atlanta area in
Fayetteville, a company called nourish and bloom, and they're a
kind of a cool new concept of a grocery store that is
essentially fully autonomous with people that can help
conserve eat it. Yeah, so Amazon had one that was similar in
Seattle, where you walk in facial recognition, here's why.
So it's Audrow Nash: that kind of thing. Jason Richards: No, it's not,
not quite that that degree, but similar. And so people are
coming in, they can kind of self self serve, they don't need to
get checked out. Right. It's, it's, it's automated, you know,
okay, so they, they wanted robots as well. But if, for
example, you know, the, the payload is huge in a robot. So,
how do you how do you make that valuable, and it'd be similar
to, you know, if you're going to shop at Walmart, for example,
versus Whole Foods, you know, the amount of money that you're
going to make per bag at Whole Foods is, is a much higher
margin. Walmart, for example. It's a totally different market.
So we're not It's not like a luxury market that we're going
after. But it is more of a high end market that we're that we're Audrow Nash: targeting, ah, so
these things, evaluate your ad, like heating and cooling, and
this kind of thing on your robot so that the the food arrives and
is still tasty, not like, with DoorDash, if it's slightly cold,
or something like this. So it's the luxury market with
subsidized a bit too, Jason Richards: you know, if
that makes sense, they're making higher margins on products that
they're selling anyway, I mean, you know, Whole Foods and
Walmart, they don't sell exactly the same thing. But the margins
are definitely different. Right. So, so that's part of it. And
then the other part is, is also the, that becomes a unique, you
know, unique service that they can provide that nobody else
does. So then drive more traffic from a marketing perspective.
Yeah, oh, I can have a robot deliver it to me, these people
can do that. And these people can't. So I'm going to shop
here, even if it cost me a little bit more. Audrow Nash: I know that it's
cool for you guys. But I'm looking forward to the day that
it's not uncommon for robots to deliver things. I think that
would be sweet. Jason Richards: Yeah, me too.
Actually. Audrow Nash: That'd be nice.
Okay, now, complete non sequitur. How does your robot
deal with stairs? Jason Richards: It doesn't. Audrow Nash: Yes, so what? So
I'm imagining, like in San Francisco, it's not always the
case that there are nice curbs to get around. So it may just be
like a sheer drop onto the street kind of thing. Does this?
I don't know. i How do you guys decide to not do stairs? With
the tracks? And it? Does that affect? Where the rope? I'm sure
it affects where the robot can go? And what cities you can
deploy in things like this? Jason Richards: Yeah, the the,
because there's a couple things as well. I mean, San Francisco,
Seattle as well. The San Francisco especially is known
for some very steep streets. Right. And so there's some areas
that we were five degrees and Audrow Nash: someplace. Yeah,
exactly. Yeah. This kind of, so Jason Richards: we wouldn't, we
wouldn't put a robot in that area just for that reason. So we
had to make a couple of design decisions, right, like all
engineers do. And one of those limitations is we said, Okay,
where can we deploy this thing? And we said anywhere that is ADA
compliant with current, you know, if Audrow Nash: visibility American
Disabilities associated to a wheelchair should be able to get Jason Richards: around there.
Correct. So any ramp, and I don't remember what the exact
slope is, for that, but we said that that that is going to be
kind of the max grade that we're going to we're going to be on
which is still pretty steep. I think it's 18%, if I'm not
mistaken. So it's still significant. I mean, somebody is
a real metric. Give me Audrow Nash: degrees. So yeah,
100% is straight up and so 18% is 20% of 90 degrees. So Jason Richards: yeah, I think
yeah, exactly like that. So, it's not nothing though, right?
It's, it's, it's sticking really soon. So, so but you know, same
thing, you know, at some point, you know, you don't want this
thing flipping over on its back, you know, and, and that kind of
thing. So stairs is something that we know that we'll have to
deal with eventually, you know, same with elevators, especially
for Audrow Nash: delivery to Yeah,
elevators, like I mean, my apartment building. There's
stairs on the way in and then elevator. So it would have to
meet me outside. Jason Richards: Correct? Yeah.
And I know that, you know, a lot of UberEATS drivers and things
like that can you know, come to the door and true, you know, a
lot of them have to get wrong in you know, you hit a code. And
usually people meet you in the lobby, something like that. So
there's, it's not completely outside that the paradigm. But
when we're looking at places to deploy currently, yeah,
obviously, we're looking for places that are more flat, that
have less stairs that are usually with up kept sidewalks.
I mean, the small town that we're in is a nice little small
town to live, nice place to be from. But it's a it's a great
place to test because as terrible sidewalks. So we're
finding out a lot of things about potholes and what we can
and can't do gravel. You know, the elements getting through
mud, you know, that kind of stuff, which is obviously great
for a testbed, but not an ideal deployment. Audrow Nash: Yeah, let's see.
And we are starting to run out of time. So I would love to talk
about legislation for the robot, because this is an interesting
thing that I hadn't considered before you brought it up. So
yeah, just tell me a bit about it. In January, Jason Richards: yep. I didn't
know much about it either. Until I until we started looking at
deploying into different places. And the first place that had
legislation for delivery robots, was in Washington, DC, and that
that came out in 2017. And had different different factors
involved weight, maximum speed, when it can and can't be on the
roads, you know, safety information, etc. And so
different states have adapted that to very similar, you know,
everything is fairly similar to that. Pennsylvania, for example,
they said that, yeah, we're going to give it the same rights
as a pedestrian minus a little bit, they do have to yield to
pedestrians. And, and so, in California, and Oregon,
interestingly enough, doesn't we don't have state laws regarding
robots on sidewalks. So it's up to individual cities and
municipalities to do that. San Francisco banned them in in
2017. He said, disappointment. Yeah, yeah. And, and then they
made it very, they made a very small exception and a bunch of
hoops that had to go through, I think Postmates is allowed to
have like, two in San Francisco now. And that's it. And the
reason for that is, has to do with pedestrian space, you know,
people, again, the reason that dexpot is, is it's just
different, you know, it's different than any other
delivery devices out there. So in the legislation, they call,
they call it a PDD, or a personal delivery device. So
which essentially can be whatever you want it to be to
put a skateboard and put a motor on it, and then say, you know,
drive it remotely with a camera. That's a personal delivery
device, and it can drive wherever it wants on sidewalks.
And that's how this legislation refers to correct what we're
referring to as a delivery robot. Okay, correct. Yep. And
so the PD ds, and so a PD DS, we want it we're working very hard
with we, you know, worked with the state of Maryland on their
legislation working with the seat at Coronado on on rules
around it. And the thing is, is that people don't have a concept
of what it could be like to have DAX, if their only experience is
a remote control box that is getting in their way at their
feet. They don't want it there, versus DAX, which is a robot
like you would see in a movie that is welcome in human space,
like a dog is. And so helping, you know, change the legislation
is a big deal, because there are a lot of places that it does not
make sense. And it's because people don't want delivery
robots on their sidewalks, you know, but when they if you just
look at it from that box perspective, you know, like an
engineer, like I want this box on wheels, it makes sense. It's
an easy design, it's easy to do. But that is not what is being
accepted. So the human acceptance piece and pedestrian
space is a much bigger deal than most people realize. And that's
that's the thing, the DAX is essentially solved for that, you
know, being able to be welcomed on pedestrian spaces. Audrow Nash: That's interesting.
So it's, it's as if part of your role in being involved with that
spot, is that you have to work with lawmakers and things to try
to show them that this robot is okay in human spaces, and should
be allowed and this kind Jason Richards: of 100% Yeah,
because, because if this is the future that we want, namely want
robots to be able to do more things in pedestrian spaces, we
have to make sure that we're not legislating our way out of
existence. And not just us. I'm talking about, you know,
robotics engineers in general, if you're doing something that
is in is public facing, most people think it's all magic,
right? People that are engineers understand there's a lot of, you
know, mechanics and software and connectivity. There's a lot
behind these machines. So I guess my hope is that, you know,
other people that are out there are not doing things that would
then jeopardize, you know, urban robots for everybody else,
similar to how drones were, you know, when drones were
introduced. A lot of people did a lot of really silly things
with them, because it was cool technology. And now there's so
many regulations around drones. And they can be very, very
useful, but they're not as useful as they could be, usually
because of legislation because people did some silly things,
especially in the beginning. So Audrow Nash: okay, so how do you
avoid doing silly things? For this? If you're trying to like,
do something and you don't know, it'll be silly. I assume people
don't go into an endeavor going, this is going to go badly. And
it's going to hurt everyone, because crazy regulations will
be passed for this, like, way over correct. And make sure this
doesn't happen again. Oh, absolutely. So how do we avoid
things? Jason Richards: You have to
question? So like the San Francisco problem, for example,
I'm sure that the engineers were like, Hey, we're gonna take this
thing on the road, and everybody's going to be in love
with it. Audrow Nash: What's the problem?
What do you mean, the oh, that they're, Jason Richards: they're illegal
in San Francisco? Oh, yeah. We can't make a delivery robot to
San Francisco. And whoever, you know, was a part of doing that
test. The engineers, whomever, I'm sure they were thinking this
is going to be amazing. And everybody's going to love it.
And then people did. And so when we go to new places, for
example, usually we're finding out you know, what are the
rules, you have rules around this? And then giving usually
the police department a heads up, you know, hey, we're going
to be doing this, we're going to be here. So when they, yeah,
when they get phone calls from people, hey, this robot is or
there's this thing in my way, or this thing? hit my car,
whatever. We haven't, hopefully not. But yeah, yeah, there are
others that have. So when they get calls, they're not
completely blindsided, and then they get an angry phone call
from the mayor. Right? And then that's how those things happen.
You know, it's a couple decisions makers, they hear from
some angry people in their city that can then essentially, like,
make it up make little buddy eyes. Yeah, yeah. So just more
being aware and conscious of, you know, where, where are you
at, you know, who's around, and making sure that that, and not
necessarily calling City Hall because they won't know. But if
you call usually the local police department, and just ask,
Hey, you know, we're gonna be in this area with this robot. Is
there any rules around that? They'll usually be able to tell
you yes or no, you say, great. We just wanted to let you know
we're in the area, give you the heads up. And so that, you know,
if it's some robot rolling along the street, and people think
Armageddon just happened, that they can realize no, no, no,
this is this company, and I've got their contact phone number,
you know, so. Audrow Nash: So this is like
going to, I don't know small towns and things like this and
or at least individual places and talking to them and telling
them. This is what we're doing talking to the local police
department. How How will it be to go bigger than there? So if
it's like, statewide, or federal or? Jason Richards: Sure, yeah, when
I talk to local police department like Portland, Oregon
isn't isn't a small town, right. But I'm calling you know, the
Portland Police Department and talking to them, whoever you
have to talk to, you know, at that, at that level, let them
know what's going on. Going from there, though, most of the
regulations are actually going through the Department of
Transportation. So it's finding who at the department of
transportation needs to be aware of this, if you're going to make
a law. Again, the legislative process takes a long time, you
know, for laws. So I would not recommend usually people go that
route first. Especially if they're a smaller VLANs Audrow Nash: are going to keep
growing kind of unfettered, you would need these laws in place
at a state and then maybe federal level, correct for this
kind of thing. Jason Richards: Yeah. And
federally, I don't know if that will ever, it might, you know,
come come about some regulatory agency like the FAA, the Federal
Aviation Administration for drones, but probably not, it'll
probably stay at a state level and a local level. And so the
more that you can build rapport there Audrow Nash: by completing all
of the local police departments, yep, Jason Richards: that you're safe
on there, and you're going to be responsible. That's the thing
that people care about more than anything, it's this thing is
safe, and we're being responsible. And even the bigger
piece of that, you know, obviously we don't have time
talking about privacy and you know, things like that data
security, this isn't big brother spying on you, you know, that
kind of thing. But, but as long as people know, they know that
they Audrow Nash: may get it written
in Yeah, yeah. Okay. Yeah, that's cool. Let's see. So what
is the timeline for you guys like beginning to wrap up? What
do you expect the next few years for you guys? Or where are you
going? Yeah, yeah. Jason Richards: So I expect the
next couple, a couple of years, you know, 2022, the goal is
really to have about 100 robots out in service in different
places, we want to keep it to about, you know, 10, maybe 12
geographic locations, you know, so by that, you know, Los
Angeles, well, there's Long Beach, and there's different
places. So, you know, if we're in Greater Los Angeles, how do
we grow from there from that hub? Atlanta, Georgia, you know,
how do we grow from that hub, we go to Washington, DC, how do we
go from that hub. And so we want to have about 10 to 12 hubs or,
you know, bigger deployments in a geographic region that we can
then grow and expand from, because that will really, you
know, really set the tempo for commercializing. So with the
crowdfunding rounds, being able to build the robots that we need
to deploy them into these areas. And then once we have that,
essentially, the operational piece has been figured out,
right, there's revenue, so that more it'll attract more
investors, maybe higher level investors. So then we can go
from that and then manufacture on a greater scale to, you know,
1000 o'clock, this kind of thing? Exactly, yeah, bring the
cost down, bring the autonomy up. Because both of those things
happen, right? It makes you know, better, better margins, so
you can grow faster, and then be able to be more the face of
robots in the same way that Tesla became kind of the face of
electric cars. We think that DAX is going to be more of the face
of, of urban robotics that does delivery, because delivery
robots, again, isn't a unique example, or isn't a unique idea.
But the way that we're going about it is that it's cool.
People want that to be in their towns and on their streets. So
it's going to be readily accepted in in ways that other
companies probably won't be right now. Audrow Nash: Or hopefully, so
yeah. Yeah. Awesome. Okay. And then, what have been some of
the, like, larger challenges for you guys so far? And what would
you do differently? to kind of get even where you are still? Jason Richards: Yeah, um, larger
challenges. You know, one of the things, you know, is, is
building an operating system from the ground up because Audrow Nash: of an operating
system from the ground. Yeah. Jason Richards: Oh, yeah. Called
DAX Oh, s that are DAX, those, say, Dax. Audrow Nash: It's like, we're at
the end of the interview. And that's a very interesting thing.
Okay. Jason Richards: It is very
interesting. The founder, great, great guy. And so his his thing
is, you know, obviously, business savvy enough to know
that we can't just open up access to everybody out there in
open source at this point. But that is the ultimate, you know,
I think that's his ultimate objective is he wants to be able
to open up DAC, so S, which is a Ross like, software, you know,
but it's way more than Audrow Nash: that it does
message passing and things like this store. Yeah. Yeah. And it
helped and visualization perhaps. Jason Richards: Yeah, it does,
it does a lot of pieces. And one of the pieces that we have is,
as far as the firmware piece is called a nova node. So it, it
basically is an extensible piece of the robot. So you can plug in
another Nova node. So for example, we say, Okay, we need
an iteration where DAX has an arm so we can push buttons or
whatever, we plug in another Nova node. And then DAX knows,
oh, now I have this arm. And now I'm able to do this, this thing.
And it's, it's a higher level intelligence and has to do with
a lot of the patents in the higher level architecture stuff.
But Daksa was that was that's something that is absolutely
fascinating to me, my background is software. So it's, it's
really fun for me to be able to nerd out with the the software
guys a little bit and hear the high level architecture around
it. And again, that that was one of the things that the founder
wants, I mean, he he, this is the vision that he has for this
could be like a future thing. So we want to make a an operating
system that, you know, that is able to be open source so that
other people can can develop against it as well and build
their own stuff similar to like how Ross is, if that makes
sense. You know, people are familiar with the Ross, you
know, robot operating system. But DAX DAX Oh, s would be
similar in that vein. Audrow Nash: So like, is it? Is
it a real operating system? Because the robot operating
system is not a real operating system? It's like a flavor of
Linux or something, or what is your deck? So yeah, you'd be
right about that. Yeah, Jason Richards: it's it's it's
more of a flavor of another one. But it's, yeah. When you talk
about Ross, people think oh, operating. I know. Yes. The
communists know, for sure. Yeah. But so. So yeah, we'll put it
that way. Yes. So yeah, on Linux, a lot of Linux based. Audrow Nash: I feel like it's a
very interesting idea. And one of the things that I see is kind
of like I mean, one of the things that's really nice with
Ross is the whole community and all of the things that have kind
of become fairly battle hardened there. If it's if it's too big
of a deviation from like Ubuntu or some of the other larger
distributions, I feel like it would make it so that there is
you can't reuse a lot of what exists even like, sensor
packages and stuff. But you guys are clearly doing things with
different sensors. So yeah, I don't know, right? Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Is it similar enough that you can use like anything on
Ubuntu? Or? Oh, okay. So it's not that large of a deviation
for this kind of thing? Is it real time? So is it a real time
operating system? Yes. Cool. So it's deterministic? That's
awesome. Jason Richards: Yeah, it's one
of the one of the patents that Audrow Nash: could be my talking
a little bit longer. So we could talk a bit about this shirt.
Yeah. I talked about that something at the hour to run a
no, no, i Yeah. i Jason Richards: I'll take off a
little bit after that. But yes, yeah. So the the high level, one
of the patents that was out there is being able to
essentially have a voting system. How did the I don't
remember how was put it basically democratizing decision
making. So with the, the Nova nodes, for example, you know,
that the robot has several different ways that it can
communicate, but then how does it know which is is the most
important thing to do? So for example, you say, hey, robot,
you need to take this package and deliver it to this, this
destination robot thing goes down that that road and says,
oh, there's a tree in the way. This boat is telling me that I
need to go that way. You know, what did the other boats say?
And being able to then analyze, what are all the other factors
going on? What is the next thing that we do? And so that was that
is? I'm like, What's your Audrow Nash: tree? But like, it
sounds like, I mean, so you could have a state machine or
something. But it sounds I mean, then that could be represented
as behavior a lot more. You have more logic kind of built in,
baked into it. Right? Jason Richards: Okay, a lot
more. Exactly. And a lot more real time type logic, like, what
is going on, right now, as the environment is changing? Because
the environments changing all the time, like, do I stop? And
so a better example would be like, Okay, I'm, I'm supposed to
deliver this package, but I see this, this six year old girl
coming towards me, do I stop and talk to the girl? You know,
based on what based on? Oh, I've got time? You know, okay, yeah,
that would vote. Okay, we're gonna vote, we're gonna stop for
30 seconds and say hi to this girl, versus just blowing past
because I've got something to do. But sometimes it can be
known, this is a higher vote, because you need to get to this
destination by this period. And you know, so. So that that is a
big piece of kind of the patents behind it is being able to have
a voting system. Yeah. I mean, to know what to do next. Audrow Nash: Interesting. Yeah.
I mean, the voting system, like you could you could figure out
an, like, several ways of scheduling, what would be
important. It could be probabilistic. It could be like
a integer voting system count. It could be real numbers, or
whatever it might be. Yeah. And then it sounds like it's a
movie. So it sounds like you have more of a behavior tree
setup, where it's like, I'll choose this or this or this
based on different options that are available. And that's very
baked into this, this kind of conditional logic of what to do.
So maybe it has a nice representation of how to encode
these kinds of behaviors, or something is that so it has a
nice way for programmers to define what it is to that should
be considered in making decisions or how to prioritize?
Yes, yeah. Jason Richards: Yes. I'm sure
that Wilkinson is our he was a, he worked at Tesla for a while,
and I'm sure he would be shaking sensing. Jason, you're totally
butchering it. He was one of the main architects of it. But
anyway, Audrow Nash: so with that, I
noticed right now, you don't have very much on your on the
company GitHub website. Yeah. It would be very nice if this that
you're talking about would be open source. So that can be
poked around. And we can look at it in this kind of thing,
because that would be very cool. What Yeah, what is on there is
mostly JavaScript, which is interesting to me. Could you
tell me a little bit about the decision? I don't know. It's
like your operating system. A lot of the code that you're
running is running in like a Node js framework, which is like
a, but is it server side JavaScript framework? Jason Richards: Yeah, we get a
lot. We do do a lot in Node js. Audrow Nash: So Gotcha. Yeah,
you Interesting. So it's gonna be like a no JS Ross like thing
that has behavior trees. Would that be a way to think of? What
do you call it again, called DAX. Jason Richards: So DAX is just
like the robot XO Audrow Nash: s. Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. Gotcha. Cool. Yeah. Any timeline on open sourcing that?
Because around No, Jason Richards: I don't have a
timeline. And, unfortunately, right, you have to wait, you
know, the business, the business decisions versus, you know, it's
somewhat similar, similar with patents, you know, anybody that
that has dealt with patents or, you know, litigation around
that, patents aren't necessarily the end all, it's not like, hey,
we invented this thing. And nobody, it's actually more of a
defensive mechanism. So if a company decided that they wanted
to file a lawsuit with us and say, Hey, we have this patent on
this thing, and it's really a, well, we have a patent to, you
know, so this is why we're allowed to operate in this
space. So, so that that is, from a business standpoint, that's
the same reason that patents exist. But the other piece of it
too, obviously, is protecting intellectual property, I get
that. But in the same way, like, you know, writing, you know,
source code and things like that, if you let out too much of
the secret sauce, when you're in like infancy type stages, you
know, like this, it could, could put you out of business, not
super likely know, that somebody would take and be like, Oh,
we're gonna do exactly what DAX did. But the but the founder,
that's definitely one of the things that he absolutely loves,
is, you know, wanting to make this open source. So I don't
know what the dollar amount is, or the the comfort level is to
the point where he's gonna want to open this up to the world.
But that's something that he talks about pretty regularly,
you know, wanting Okay, well, that'd be really cool. It Audrow Nash: would probably be a
good way to battle hardened it to absolute like you guys are
running it. And what I mean, so you said you currently have
about 10 robots. By the time you have 1000 robots or something
like this, it'll probably like, the software is going to get a
lot more battle hardened, because you'll just have run it
through so many things, but the community probably could help in
that process. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. Like, it's amazing.
To me some of the things like I mean, there's so I guess, I
don't know what's public that I can say. But there's a lot of
very, I would not expect open source to be used in a lot of
really critical projects that are done by companies that have
a lot of stake in reliability. And I'm very impressed that a
lot of open source software is being used there. So it does
battle hardened. And so it might be a benefit for that reason to
and then also people would have a better point of comparison to,
to look at it and see if it's useful and this kind of thing.
And that would be awesome. Yeah, absolutely. Okay, so now we are
going a little over time. What do you I guess, wrapping up any
links or contact info or anything you'd like to share
with our listeners? Jason Richards: Sure. Yeah, I
think that, again, you know, those that are listening just
via audio, you know, can't see the robot behind me. So if you
go to DAX bot.com, that's D AX vo t.com. That's, you know, you
can see kind will Audrow Nash: links with the
episode so that they can just click if they look in the
description. Jason Richards: Yeah. And then
those of you that that are so inclined, start engine comm
slash dexpot is where we're doing our crowdfunding raise.
And you can take a look at kind of the kind of the more the
business plan around it, you know, kind of the the need and
the focus that we're, we're filling and all the legal stuff
we filed with the Securities Exchange Commission. So anyway,
those would be the two things tax bot.com and and start engine
slash tax bot. And yeah, Audrow Nash: appreciate that.
All right. Awesome. Been great interviewing you. Yeah, you too.
Thanks so much. Audrow. Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Jason Richards. Thank you again to our
founding sponsor, open robotics and I hope to see you next time 