Whatever you want, there's a beach for you
Whether it's pure luxury, water sports, perfect isolation or a party you're after, somewhere in the world is a stretch of sand that is your personal idyll
Abroad stretch of sand is the foundation for a great holiday - but which beach is right for you? Whether you're a reveller or a recluse, travelling solo or en famille, there's a shoreline that will suit your needs. But the perfect beach is rarely stumbled upon by chance; let our experts point you in the direction of the ideal spot for you to plant your umbrella this year.
Best for complete luxury Whatever your image of the perfect beach or island escape is, you'd be hard pushed not to find it in the Seychelles. Sea, of the duck-egg blue variety, and powder-white sand are the mainstays of this Indian Ocean idyll, as is luxury. There are more one-island (North Island, Denis Island, Fregate Island Private), oneresort hideaways and 24-hour butlers in the archipelago than you can throw a magnum of Krug at.
Turquoise Holidays (turquoiseholidays. co.uk) is currently offering a discounted seven-night trip to Constance Lemuria, which has access to three stunning beaches, from £1,735 per person, which includes b&b accommodation and international flights and transfers.
Best for budget For savings in the sun, Portugal is the place to beat this year. Self-cater in the Algarve's lively Albufeira, 45 minutes west from Faro airport. There is plenty to do here - rent pedalos and kayaks, explore caves, and dine on the beach. For quiet, drive 30 minutes to Praia de Albandeira, a jewel of a beach which is completely offthe tourist radar. Tiny, with white sands pinched between ochre rocks, it has no watersports, no sunbeds and few visitors.
Thomas Cook offers seven nights' self-catering from £164 per person at Ouratlantico Apartments in Albufeira, including flights and transfers.
Best for water sports Due to its position on the Ionian Sea and its topography, Lefkada is Greece's top water sports destination. In the island's north, you'll find kite-surfing at Agios Ioannis. Vasiliki Bay, in the south, is exposed to local thermal winds, creating conditions perfect for beginner surfers in the mornings, and more experienced ones in the afternoons. And then there are Lefkada's spectacular west coast beaches, including Kathisma and the must-visit Porto Katsiki. Simpson Travel (simpsontravel.com) offers one week in a self-catering villa from £1,267 per person, including flight and car hire.
Best for fly and flop Nevis is one of the most beautiful and relaxing islands in the Caribbean. Dominated by the 3,232ft Nevis Peak, it is an intensely green, sun-hat-shaped sanctuary with long stretches of beach, attractive hotels and villas, and an old-style charm. The fine white sand of Lovers Beach, a 10-minute drive away on the north of the island, is hidden from the road and has a castaway appeal with no facilities - all you have to do while here is stare out over the clear, blue water.
Scott Dunn (scottdunn.com) offers seven nights at the Four Seasons Nevis (telegraph.co.uk/tt-fourseasonsnevis) from £2,100 per person, based on two people sharing a one-bedroom cottage on a b&b basis, including flights and transfers.
Continued on page 4 Contributions from Teresa Machan, Mary Lussiana, Jane Foster, Nigel Tisdall, Marc Dubin, Demi Taylor, Anthony Horowitz, Nigel Tisdall, Fred Mawer, Tim Ecott, Lee Marshall, Anthony Peregrine, Benjamin Parker CONTINUED FROM PAGE 3 Best for a party Once among the poorest, barest Greek islands, Mykonos - starting in the late Fifties - became a bohemian mecca and is now one of the glitziest destinations in Greece. Paradise is the island's ultimate party beach, a popular spot offering water sports (including a good dive centre) by day and clubbing on the adjacent headland after dark.
The Grecotel Mykonos Blu is just steps from its own private corner of sandy Psarou Beach and has double rooms from £163 per night (telegraph.co.uk/ttmykonosblu). British Airways (ba.com) and easyJet (easyjet.com; from £41.49 each way) have seasonal flights from the UK to Mykonos.
Best for isolation You reach Cala Pregonda, with its reddish-gold sand and pink rocks, by hiking for half an hour along a track, which does a good job of weeding out the crowds. Tucked away on Menorca's quiet north coast, Pregonda's bay is protected by tiny islands, so the sea is still and crystalline. Take a picnic and water as there are no facilities on Pregonda, although there is a restaurant on the adjacent Binimel-là beach, where you can park the car.
Stay at Hotel Rural Sant Ignasi (telegraph.co.uk/tt-hotelruralsantignasi; rooms from £72 per night), a stylish 18th-century country house set in large gardens. EasyJet (easyjet.com) has flights from £34.
Best for surfing Lanzarote has long been popular with tourists chasing all-year-round sun, but its surfing potential can be somewhat overlooked. The rocky reef of La Santa Right delivers gloriously long rides, while nearby El Quemao, at the village of La Santa, is best left to the pros - this shallow spot has waves that rival Hawaii's Pipeline. Playa de Famara is popular with surfers of all standards, with a number of surf schools operating here.
Stay at the verdant oasis of Meliá Salinas (telegraph.co.uk/tt-meliasalinas; from £111 per night). Monarch (monarch.co.uk) offers flights from the UK to Lanzarote from £35 one way.
Best for finding your Zen Although it is renowned for having some of the best nightclubs in the world, Ibiza also has an absolutely beautiful coastline with dozens of tiny coves to discover. Of the island's 80 beaches, Cala Jondal is the most relaxed. Set in a secluded bay, surrounded by pines and jagged cliffs, sand-and-pebble Cala Jondal feels serene, sophisticated and happening all at the same time.
Where most beaches Email telegraph.The best a £250 Book in for laid-back luxury at ME Ibiza, where activities Best for young children Cala Llombards, a cove on the southeast coast of Majorca, is a triangular strip of white sand framed by pine trees, with boat sheds perched on the rocks. You could spend all morning snorkelling, followed by a walk around the coast to the small resort of Cala Santanyí to see Es Pontas, an archshaped rock in the sea. The abundance of nearby villas makes it ideal for a family idyll.
James Villas (jamesvillas.co.uk) offers a seaside villa with a private pool, for £1,661 for a week in June. EasyJet (easyjet.com) offers flights from London to Majorca from £28.49 one way.
Best for culture vultures When you arrive in Sicily, you're spoilt for choice on where to go: the historic cities of Palermo, Catania and Siracusa, the Etna region with its volcanic landscapes and fertile wine country; Ragusa and the other honeyhued Baroque towns of the south; the Greek temples of Agrigento, Selinunte and Segesta; Roman sites like Piazza Armerina. And then there are the miles of sandy beaches and secret rocky coves. Le Solette, a wide swathe of sand just to the west of Porto Palo, is as good a place as any to lay out your beach towel.
Just up from the beach at Porto Palo is La Foresteria Planeta Estate (telegraph.co.uk/tt-laforesteriaplaneta), which has rooms from £138. EasyJet offers flights to Palermo from £39.49.
Best for foodies A 20-minute boat ride offthe French Riviera between Marseille and Cannes, the wonderfully underdeveloped island of Porquerolles is surrounded by white sandy beaches backed by eucalyptus and pines. Plage de Notre Dame, a delicate strip of beach, shaped like a crescent moon: wide at its middle, with soft, tapered tips at each end, its curves followed by eucalyptus and pines, can be found on the northeastern corner of the island and is intimate in scale and perfect for a paddle. The only village, next to the harbour, offers fine restaurants serving Provençal cuisine. The beautiful Le Mas du Langoustier (telegraph.co.uk/tt-lemasdulangoustier) has rooms from £173 and an on-site restaurant with a Michelin star.
Best for rockpoolers, explorers young and old Closer to home, the highlight of tiny Seatown is the beach, with a steeped ochre shore bordered by green fields.
Visitors often skip it in favour of neighbours along the Jurassic Coast - trendy market town Bridport to the east, and fossil-cum-fish favourite Lyme Regis to the west - but this hamlet is a worthwhile stop for those in the know. Countryside walks from here are abundant; trek 30-40 minutes up to Golden Cap, the highest point on the south coast.
Stay at The Anchor Inn Hotel, overlooking the beach, (telegraph.co.uk/tttheanchorinnhotel; rooms from £120 per night), where you'll also find an excellent pub with unbeatable views.
Best for sunbathers You'll have seen it on posters or brochures long before you arrive, so will have no trouble recognising it - Elafonisi is a low islet tethered to the most south-westerly point of the Cretan mainland by a slightly pink-tinted sandspit, the two cradling a shallow lagoon with tropicalturquoise water. The open sea south of the spit proves more swimmable and there are ample sunbeds and brollies on the beach.
Pure Crete (purecrete.com) offers a villa in western Crete for £1,482 for a week for two adults; includes accommodation and flights.
Best for safari with your beach The pristine shores of the Maputuland Coast, high up on South Africa's northern KwaZulu-Natal shoreline, forms part of the 332,000-hectare iSimangaliso Wetland Park - a Unesco World Heritage Site for the past 25 years. Nestled along this soulexpanding stretch of golden sand is the Thonga Beach Lodge, where you'll relax in your thatched bush suite, overlooking one of Africa's most unspoilt wilderness beaches. Best of South Africa Travel (bestof southafricatravel.com) offers a seven-night family safari and beach break for £3,431 per adult and £2,592 per child; includes three nights in Zululand at Thanda Safari Lodge and four nights at Thonga Beach Lodge on all-inclusive basis. Plus internal flights and seven days' car hire. Excludes international flights (ba.com; from £584 return).
Best for deep-sea fishing and boating Lying between the wilderness of Everglades National Park and the deep blue waters of the Florida Strait you'll find Islamorada, where ample charter boats with cheerful captains can lead you on deep-sea fishing adventures. On shore, you'll enjoy the Keys' staples, including conch fritters and blackened fish. Few tour operators include trips to the Florida Keys, but this is a trip you can easily organise independently - do look for a fly-drive package, as they often provide the best deals on car hire. Fly to Miami and drive south of Miami, on Highway 1, to the jewel-like string of islands that arc 120 miles offthe southern tip of Florida down into the Caribbean, finish just 90 miles from Cuba. British Airways (ba.com) offers a fly-drive package from £483, including return flights and car hire. Stay at the charming Fiftiesstyle Postcard Inn Beach Resort & Marina (telegraph.co.uk/tt-postcardinn; rooms from £128 per night).
Best for sun, sea and karate Located in the prefecture of Okinawa, Japan's "sunshine isles" are the country's subtropical alter ego. The capital Naha, located midway down the island chain, is closer to the tip of the Philippines than it is to Tokyo and from the most southerly island (weather permitting), it's possible to see Taiwan. Less conservative than their mainland counterparts the Okinawans swap salaryman attire for kariyushi - a local take of the Hawaiian shirt - and rice for the purple potato. Pack an appetite - it's worth a visit for the food experience alone. Longevity rates in Okinawa are among the highest in the world - diet, martial arts (this is the home of karate), climate and spirituality are all said to play a part. Princess Cruises (princess.com) has a seven-day Ryukyu Islands and Taiwan cruise round-trip from Kobe, Japan, from £758 per person excluding flights. The cruise calls at Kobe, Okinawa, Ishigaki and Taipei.
COM; XPOSUREPHOTOS.RALITA; DAVID FOURCOMMUNICATIONS; Best for divers and snorkellers On Anguilla's eastern side, two-mile Shoal Bay has blinding white sand and turquoise waters. The lower half of the beach is the quieter end, while the upper end has villas and cottages up against the sand. The nearby coral reefs attract snorkellers and divers. Spend your evenings watching the sunset over the bay from one of the lively beach bars as the vibrant blue waves lap at the shore. Carrier (carrier.co.uk) offers a seven-night package to Four Seasons Resort, Anguilla, from £2,485 per person on a b&b basis, based on two adults sharing, including flights and transfers.
Best for retro beach Head to Cuba before the beaches get too built up. Varadero is a spectacular 20km expanse of pure white sand in the Caribbean, and is so large that, even when its dozens of hotels are full, there is still adequate space to lay out a towel on the sands of the Atlantic coastline. Enjoy Cuba's heady mix of faded Spanish colonial cities, sputtering Fifties Cadillacs, wonderful live music and world-class cigars before the country changes beyond recognition. Consider a Havana/Varadero two-centre stay - other resorts are more isolated. Thomson (thomson.co.uk) offers seven nights all-inclusive at Grand Memories Varadero from £815, based on two adults sharing, and including flights.
Best for honeymooners A 50-minute flight west of Tahiti, Bora Bora is the ultimate getaway. Set on an islet on the north-east side of the lagoon, the Four Seasons Resort enjoys uninterrupted views of the dramatic peaks of Bora Bora - particularly enchanting at sunset. Each overwater villa is a pocket oasis, complete with private deck with steps to the sea and a free-standing bathtub beside sliding doors which, when opened, reveal views of Bora Bora's Mount Otemanu across the lagoon. It is a strong contender for sexiest tub in the world. The private beach, cathedral-like spa with couples' massage room and poolside cabanas are also fabulous. Kuoni (kuoni.co.uk) offers seven nights at the Four Seasons, Bora Bora, in a beach view bungalow from £6,354 per person, including flights and group transfers in resort.
Best for backdrop You'll be spoilt for choice at Tulum beach: do you gaze out past the flour-white sands towards the glistening blue sea, or backwards, at the Mayan ruins of Tulum, just a stone's throw away? Tulum has one of the most beautiful archaeological sites to be found anywhere. A Mayan walled city, it consists of a pyramid and several temples. But what makes it unforgettable is its position, on the edge of a cliff, with the waves crashing below.
Virgin Holidays (virginholidays.co.uk) offers a seven-night all-inclusive trip, staying at Dreams Tulum Resort & Spa, based on two sharing, from £1,035 per person.
