Pluckers returns to roost with 2 locations
Austin-based Pluckers Wing Bar is in expansion mode.
After focusing on other cities in recent years, the homegrown chain that was cooked up in 1995 by a couple of hungry University of Texas students is in the process of adding a pair of Austin locations.
The first to open will be in The Linc, a shopping center at U.S. 290 and Interstate 35 in North Austin that's undergoing a dramatic transformation. Look for that location to debut May 30.
"The Linc will be the first new Pluckers location in Austin in almost 10 years," Pluckers co-founder Dave Paul said. "Over those years, we have changed a lot about the look and feel of our stores. We believe Pluckers fans in Austin will be very excited with our new store prototype."
To help celebrate, one Pluckers fan will win free food for a year.
Follow the chain on social media for more details as the opening nears.
The other new location will be in Oak Hill Plaza, at 7101 W. Texas 71 in Southwest Austin. It is scheduled to open late this year.
Grooming in a man cave
A chain of men's grooming shops has big plans for Texas.
Hammer & Nails says it plans 50 locations across the state, including up to six in the Austin area, offering manicures, pedicures, haircuts, beard trims and shaves in a "man cave nirvana."
The first Austin shop could be up and running as soon as this summer.
"Austin is a magical and attractive place - attractive not only in terms of natural beauty, but also in terms of its gravitational pull for people," said Ron Guthrie, who is the chain's Austin-area representative.
"Austin's quality of life has become its biggest economic development engine, and the city's diverse demographic structure serves to support and enrich its quality of life. Because of this, I actually think that the Austin market can potentially be one of the best in the country."
Guthrie said Hammer & Nails plans to market itself to a wide swath of Austin men: "local government employees, college students, collegiate athletes, high-tech industry workers and the blue-collar workers."
"A visit to Hammer & Nails is a gift-worthy experience and a chance for a guy to be treated to something special," he said. "Each hand-and-foot station has its own dedicated television with a remote, and all customers are treated to a complimentary drink of their choosing. Our locations are low-lit with dark wood and steel detailing and oversized bison leather chairs. We offer a unique atmosphere that no other salon provides."
For more details, visit hammerandnailsgrooming.com.
Spa adds location
Hand & Stone, a spa specializing in massage and facials, has opened yet another Austin location.
The new spa, operated by franchisee Teri Evans, is in the North Hills Town Center at 10740 Research Blvd. in Northwest Austin.
"Since I moved to Austin in 1998, I've always lived in the North Hills Town Center area so this is home to me," she said. "I grocery shop, dry clean, dine and go to the gym in this area.
"After deciding to open multiple Hand & Stone locations in the Austin market, I waited for a space in this area to be available so I could open here. About a year ago, this dream became a reality," she said.
Learn more about Hand & Stone by visiting handandstone.com.
The express lane...
The first 365 by Whole Foods Market store in Texas - and the fourth in the country - is now open at 5001 183A toll road in Cedar Park. The 365 stores are Whole Foods' latest attempt to reach cost-conscious shoppers. Read our recent story at atxne.ws/2p1wVWe.... Payless Shoesource announced plans to close 400 "underperforming" stores nationwide, including two in Austin at 2901 S. Capital of Texas Highway (Loop 360) and 12901 N. Interstate 35.... The Round Rock Gander Mountain store, at 3203 S. I-35, has started its store closing sale.... The former Golfsmith store in the Arboretum area, at 10001 Research Blvd., has taken on the name of its new owner, Golf Galaxy.... Pollo Tropical has closed all its locations in Austin, Dallas and Nashville, Tenn., as part of a corporate restructuring that will allow the chicken chain to focus on core markets.... Olive Garden is now open in San Marcos at 1305 S. I-35. The restaurant says its arrival created more than 160 new jobs.... Schlotzsky's has also set up shop in San Marcos. You can find the sandwich shop at 205 W. Hopkins St.... Famous Footwear is now welcoming shoppers at its new Lakeline Plaza location, 11066 Pecan Park Blvd. in Northwest Austin.... It's Italian Market & Cafe, a market and cafe featuring food, specialty items and wines from Italy, will open its second Austin location at Post South Lamar, 1500 S. Lamar Blvd. in South Austin.... LightRX Face & Body, which offers a variety of face and body treatments, is planning its first Central Texas location at the Village at Cedar Park, 700 E. Whitestone Blvd. in Cedar Park.... Bucketfeet, a footwear company specializing in limited-edition designer shoes, has signed a lease at Domain Northside, 11421 Rock Rose in North Austin.
Contact Gary Dinges
at 512-912-5987.
Twitter: @gdinges
