Bonjour to new Kidderminster restaurant following grand opening
A NEW £1million Kidderminster restaurant has been given the civic seal of approval after opening its doors to diners.
Dignitaries were invited to a special VIP launch event at Bistro Pierre, in Riverside Walk, the night before the restaurant opened on Friday (June 30).
Among them was the Mayor of Kidderminster Councillor Nicky Gale who said the eatery was a boost to Kidderminster’s local economy.
Up to 60 jobs have been created with the restaurant, which seats 140 diners, and has seen a 4,000 sq ft unit transformed into a traditional bistrot in the town’s newest leisure and retail development.
The company was founded by school friends Rob Beacham and John Whitehead in Nottingham in 1994.
Mr Beacham said: “I’m particularly proud of our design team, who have managed to transform our Kidderminster site into a restaurant which will really transport diners to France.
“Now is the perfect time to have opened - as the summer months draw in, the bistrot will offer customers the perfect location to enjoy our fantastic food.
“More and more people now see Kidderminster as the destination of choice and I’m confident that we’ll build a loyal customer base in the town and hope to attract visitors to the growing development as well as cater to those families visiting popular attractions in the region.”
Councillor Ian Hardiman, Wyre Forest District Council’s cabinet member for planning and economic regeneration said: “We extend a warm welcome to Bistrot Pierre in Kidderminster.
“I’m sure this very attractive new restaurant will draw in friends and families to dine and be a key attraction at the newly developed Riverside.
“The council has recently invested £2 million in revamping the public areas around the town centre and we are delighted to see that private companies, such as Bistrot Pierre, are recognising that Kidderminster has a lot to offer and has an exciting future for investors, residents and visitors alike.”
Riverside developer and director of Exchange Street Properties Max Goucher added: “There’s nothing quite like it in the area and I’m sure that the bistrot will do well, I have no doubt about that.”
