Plans for new hotel unveiled- and could create more than 100 jobs
MORE than 100 jobs could be created in a Hampshire town as plans for a new hotel have been unveiled.
Village Hotels has unveiled plans for a 153-room hotel along with a state-of-the-art gym, a Starbucks and a pub and grill in Chandler’s Ford.
This comes after 800 new jobs are set to be created within the borough.
Now Village Hotels has announced that it is planning to invest “significantly” on a site on Bournemouth Road.
A Village Hotels spokesman said: “Whilst Village Hotels is undertaking a planning application, the brand is working closely with local residents and businesses to get their feedback on the exciting scheme. More than just a hotel, Village offers a place to dine out, stay, work out and play, all under one roof. The brand is dedicated to providing its guests and local residents with everything they could need under one roof.”
The cost of the scheme has not been revealed yet but the company confirmed that a planning application is to be submitted to Eastleigh Borough Council in the next few months.
Village Hotels said the plans to develop a new hotel in the Eastleigh borough represents the latest phase of the company's investment in Hampshire and follows the opening of the Village Hotel Club Portsmouth .
The news of the plans proposed for the site in Chandler’s Ford has been welcomed by the local authorities.
Keith House, council leader at Eastleigh Borough Council, said: “Village Hotels’ proposal for Chandler’s Ford looks really exciting. It will bring jobs and growth in the important hotel sector that also brings additional spend to the Borough. Their concept of a quality hotel with restaurant and leisure facilities looks spot on for this area.”
As previously reported, 500 more jobs will be created by the the £20m Alpha Park in Chandler's Ford and a £50m train upgrade will create 200 jobs in Eastleigh while the Hamilton Business Park in Hedge End is to create up to 100 jobs.
Alan Broadhurst, borough councillor for Chandler's Ford West ward and vice chairman at Chandler's Ford Parish Council, said new jobs are needed in the area.
He added: " We'll have to see the application when it comes. If it brings jobs to the area it must be quite good. We have to make sure they don't increase traffic congestion, we have to look at it but we obviously need more jobs."
He also said: "If they are going to have conference facilities they could have a positive impact to the area but we don't know what their market is so we can't say exactly what's the impact on the economy."
CONTACT ME
t:02380424416
e:maria.zaccaro@dailyecho.co.uk
