Charming old house home to a cool eatery
THE Bull & Claw recently found its new home on the leafy Fenyang Road, offering a similar yet different experience to its loyal followers.
They still guarantee to provide some of the best lobster and steak in town but now, you will have the chance to wine and dine in a charming old Shanghai villa with an outdoor patio. The venue was previously home to the Spanish restaurant El Patio.
My last visit was at Sunday noon time with high temperature of 38 celsius degrees. The two-floor venue was surprisingly occupied. Regarding the decor, the team did it right ­— an old world charm is balanced with modern furnishings and simplistic touches.
The sun-filled first floor is ideal for weekend brunch.
I started off my brunch with a refreshing cocktail drink instead of the usual Bloody Mary. Lime-a-Lekker (70 yuan/US$10.4) was newly introduced to its drink menu and it is well worth a try.
A delightful summer cocktail featuring the mixture of gin, lime, sugar, bitters and a biscuit coated rim. The experienced bartender was inspired by a regular customer when he developed this cocktail after he asked for lime juice on top of a Lotus Biscoff cookie.
The food menu equally celebrates the sweet and savory dishes. As the key feature of the restaurant is still the live lobsters, I went for the Lobster Benedict as my savory start.
These days, this famous brunch item is eggs Benedict, composed of English muffins and topped with poached eggs, ham and hollandaise. It is a fodder of reinvention by chefs everywhere, including the Bull & Claw.
The lobster version here hits the right spot. The poached eggs only need a gentle nudge to release its runny yolk and the whole chunky lobster tail on top of it was tender and buttery.
I also liked the smashed avocado & feta with poached eggs and smoked salmon on toasted ciabatta, served with rocket and blistered cherry tomatoes, a good alternative if you crave savory food.
As for the sweet dishes, I’ve shared waffles and French toast with friends. I prefer a warm waffle as it is simple with maple syrup and honeycomb cream. The French toast, served with cinnamon spiced banana, maple cream and peanut crumble, didn’t leave much impression though.
There are several different choices for brunch. One course is 85 yuan, two courses is 145 yuan while three courses costs 165 yuan. The price will go up if you order Lobster dishes or the Bull & Claw Breakfast.
For those who love to drink non stop from brunch time, house free flow (148 yuan) or premium free flow (218 yuan) is a must.
Bull & Claw
Opening hours: 11am-midnight
Tel: 3356-7608
Address: 110 Fenyang Rd
Average price: 250 yuan
