Spa to offer a view to dine for!
PLANS have been drawn up to expand the facilities at one of North Staffordshire’s premier spa resorts to attract more tourists.
Moddershall Oaks wants to create a ‘luxury’ restaurant and bar with ‘panoramic views’ of the countryside, as well as building a new fitness suite.
The owners say the scheme would enable the business, near Stone, to grow and attract extra visitors to the area – and create 10 new jobs.
Two applications have been submitted to Stafford Borough Council for the complex – a popular wedding venue – the first of which is for a two-storey extension to the existing restaurant, kitchen and function room. It would see an open-plan bar and restaurant created on the first floor. In a planning statement, Moddershall Oaks said: “The objectives of the proposals is to create a destination restaurant and bar which will draw in additional tourism to the area.
“The design objectives are to provide a high-quality, well-designed development that respects the site and surroundings and provides Moddershall Oaks with the additional to enhance its current business operations. The design will provide unrivalled panoramic views of the surrounding backdrop of the landscaped gardens and lake.”
A second planning application for the venue, which has been in business for 15 years, is for a new gym and leisure area. It would feature two studios for classes, such as yoga, and create a ‘centre for promoting lifestyle and healthy living’. The latest plans have been lodged after family-owned Moddershall Oaks carried out £550,000 of renovations last year. Work included creating an outdoor vitality spa pool, a Finnish Kelo sauna cabin with scented wood, feature showers and an outdoor log fire. The venue also offers a swimming pool, hydrotherapy pool, steam room, heated loungers, beauty treatment suite, gym and more than 70 acres of parkland. It has 10 bedroom suites all with use of an outdoor hot tub and a deli and lakeside restaurant.
News of the development has today been welcomed by customers and tourism leaders. Ciara Jagger, from Wolstanton, had her wedding reception at the venue.
The 35-year-old said: “I’m pleased to see Moddershall Oaks is planning to expand – the business is a great success story in the area.
“I love to take family and friends there and we had such a wonderful wedding day.”
Mark Winnington, Staffordshire County Council’s economic growth leader and deputy chairman of tourism body Destination Staffordshire, said: “Moddershall Oaks is one of the region’s top leisure destinations and wedding venues. Its expansion will improve upon the quality facilities it provides, but create more jobs. We’re pleased to see its success continue.”
The business – founded in December 2000 – currently employs more than 50 staff. Stafford Borough Council will make a final decision on the plans in the next few weeks.
