Domino’s topples into town
FAST food giant Domino’s has opened a town centre branch with the first customers queuing around the block for a slice of free pizza.
The takeaway has created 25 jobs after opening in St Edward Street, Leek, yesterday afternoon.
And unlike most other Domino’s across the country, diners can also opt to eat in.
Store opening manager Harry Gardner said: “When we open in a small town like this, people seem to welcome the brand very well because there are not many chains here.
“This is the smallest town that we, as a franchise, own a store but we’ve got very high hopes for it. This is only one of five branches with dine-in facilities.
“We don’t want it to have a big brand feel. Our franchise operates in small branches because we want our stores to have a more personal feel.”
Domino’s has launched as McDonald’s continues to look for a site to open a restaurant in the town.
It is still looking for pizza makers, customer service staff and delivery drivers.
Store manager Nick Ridgeway said: “We’re thrilled to have opened our doors to the people of Leek.
“There are also plenty of employment opportunities for people living in Leek to join our growing team.”
Among those waiting in line for a free slice of pizza was payment system engineer Matt Kail.
The 39-year-old, from Haregate, Leek, said: “I prefer McDonald’s or KFC but it’s good for the town and other chains might follow on from this. It makes the town feel more modern and is good for jobs.”
Insolvency consultant Steve Lancaster, aged 45, of Junction Road, Leek, said: “It’s definitely better than having an empty shop and it has also created local jobs.
“I like the independence of Leek but this brings something more modern into the town. It’s good to have that balance and this will cater for a younger crowd.
“I don’t think it will affect other fast food places because not everyone likes pizza. I still think there should be a McDonald’s or KFC too.
“This is a win-win for everyone but I wouldn’t want to see Derby Street become a typical high street.”
Student Aria Dele comes from London but is living in Leek while studying business management at Buxton and Leek College.
The 18-year-old said: “It’s good for Leek because there isn’t a McDonald’s or KFC here and hopefully this will encourage them to open too.
“It might create difficulties for some other businesses but on the whole it’s a good thing for the town.
“Leek is very traditional but it needs more stuff for the younger generation and this will provide a good place to hang out.”
Domino’s was officially opened by town mayor Councillor Brian Johnson.
He said: “It’s a well-known franchise and I’m sure the youngsters will love coming here.
“The next one on the list is McDonald’s, if they can find somewhere to go.
“The special thing with Leek is it is full of independent shops in all lines of business but it would be nice to see some more chain stores too.”
