Dine in style at seaside venue
ADVERTISING FEATURE
Whether it’s drinks with friends or a romantic dinner overlooking the water with your loved one, make the Glenelg Pier Hotel your destination of choice for food, fun and entertainment.
The seaside venue, located on the Holdfast Promenade, has got everything you need under one roof including multiple restaurants, a gaming room, beer garden, nightclub, bar, function centre and accommodation.
It is locally owned and managed and has been operating since 2002, providing the local community with a place to unwind and enjoy all that’s on offer.
The restaurants cater to all sorts of patrons with large breakfast, lunch and dinner menus featuring plenty of options for even the fussiest of eaters.
With breathtaking ocean views from every corner of the venue, Glenelg Pier Hotel is well positioned to host your next private function including birthdays, engagements, christenings, weddings, corporate conferences, meetings and more.
There are multiple beachside rooms catering for small groups of 10 to 150 seated, or 300 for a standing cocktail event.
The hotel is now taking bookings for Christmas shows on Saturday, December 9 and 16, as well as New Year’s Eve. Phone 8350 3188 to secure your spot.
Many of the friendly staff members you will come across at the hotel have worked there for years, some since the very beginning.
This includes the loveable Sree who manages Pantai restaurant. Sree is turning 70 this week and invites the community to help him celebrate until the end of August.
Pop into the restaurant from Monday to Friday, noon to 3pm, and enjoy his special Pantai all-you-can-eat buffet for $19.90 per person. Groups are welcome and bookings are required.
The Glenelg Pier Hotel is open for breakfast between 6.30am and 10.30am, lunch from 11.30am to 3pm (with $11.90 lunch specials), dinner from 5.30pm to 9pm, and all day dining on Saturday and Sunday.
The Pier Bar opens Monday to Wednesday, from 4pm, and Thursday to Sunday from noon.
The bar has a daily happy hour from Monday to Friday, 5pm to 7pm, Thursday and Friday, noon to 2pm, Friday and Saturday, 9pm to 11pm, and Saturday and Sunday, 2pm to 5pm. A live DJ spins the decks until 2am on Fridays and Saturdays to set the mood for a fun night out.
The Gaming Room opening hours are 9am to 2am daily.
Discounted customer parking is now offered to all patrons – just ask one of the staff members for details.
So what are you waiting for? Head to the Glenelg Pier Hotel and experience excellent customer service and hospitality at its finest.
Glenelg Pier Hotel, 18 Holdfast Promenade, Glenelg,8350 3112, glenelgpier.com.au
