At the Crossroads Family Restaurant Ltd.
At the Crossroads Family Restaurant Ltd., in Elmira, is a local restaurant offering you a luxurious dining experience like no other. We provide delicious homestyle cooking and baking, nestled in the heart of breathtaking Mennonite country.
For years, visitors have been entering our charming corridors to sample a taste of serene Mennonite life and enjoy a warm and inviting dining and shopping experience. When you are seeking a nostalgic taste of mother's cooking and elegant décor, choose At the Crossroads Family Restaurant Ltd.
Delicious Buffets - At the Crossroads Family Restaurant Ltd. caters to everyone's tastes and dietary needs. You are never limited in choice with a generous selection of succulent menu dishes.
Our various buffets feature hearty soups and salads, fresh homemade, crusty breads, and hot dishes. Our buffet consists of a pizza station and a decadent dessert table with ice cream in a rainbow of flavours.
We sport buffets for Seasonal Weekday Breakfast Buffet, Saturday Breakfast Buffet, and Sunday Brunch Buffet. Whether you want to dine in for lunch or dinner, our wide array of menu choices will stimulate your imagination and tastebuds.
Our restaurant accommodates approximately 340 people on one level. If you are seeking an elegant place to hold your next conference, make Elmira's favourite restaurant your choice for celebrating or party planning. We boast spacious private rooms, including a conference room, a Maple Room seating 32 guests, Garden Room, and the elegant Atrium seating 60 patrons.
Receive specials and promotions for seniors with a 10 per cent discount off of any of our regular priced buffets. For an after dinner treat, browse our large gift shop, The Mercantile, filled with creative gift ideas and inspirational cards. Visit our Quilt Shop - Quilter's Nine Patch and rekindle your passion for quilting and rug hooking using creative patterns.
At the Crossroads Family Restaurant Ltd. is the place to experience fond memories of Mennonite country. For more information or to arrange a private function, contact, call 519-669-8117 or fax 519-669-0430. Visit us at 384 Arthur Street South in Elmira, Ontario.
Call Send SMS Call from mobile Add to Skype You'll need Skype CreditFree via Skype
Sidebar:
Visit Our Profile Page.
