Children guaranteed warm welcome at new restaurant
HUNDREDS of people flocked to Nottinghamshire’s new multi-million-pound family restaurant when it opened yesterday.
Eager to see what Holly Tree Farm had in store, the first customer came through the door at 7.20am for breakfast – and was presented with a bottle of champagne. The new-build pub restaurant, in Nuthall, specialises in show-stopping cakes, carveries and cask ales.
General manager Steve Richards said: “It’s been really, really good. I am pleasantly surprised by the number of people coming through the door especially with the weather as it’s quite frosty – and the phone has been ringing off the hook.”
More than 300 people had visited within the space of a few hours to sample the buffet breakfast and carvery – which has a choice of four roasts and 11 different vegetables, plus roast spuds, mash and a daily potato special.
“People are amazed by the size of the cakes and the choice of veg,” said Mr Richards.
The 320-seater venue has been designed like two separate venues. The family dining area has a “distraction area” where parents can keep a watchful eye on their youngsters. The cordoned-off section has children’s rides, interactive activities and a big TV screen showing films for the under-fives and Xboxes and games for older kids.
Those wanting a more adult environment can enjoy a pint from Nottingham Brewery or one of the luscious layered cakes, well away from the Farm Yard play area at the opposite end of the homely restaurant, that’s all decked out for Christmas.
The venue will open at 7am every day, serving food from morning to night – from a full English and jacket potatoes to chicken tikka masala and burgers.
The venture, which has created 100 full and part-time jobs, is part of Greene King’s Farmhouse Inns brand and the third to open in Nottinghamshire.
Located in Lawrence Drive, off Woodhouse Way, it’s close to both Nottingham Business Park and new housing estate Woodhouse Park. It’s also within easy reach of Junction 26 of the M1.
Getting off to a flying start, customers have given the food and service a five-star rating. Tiffany Martin said: “Lovely pub, fantastic for families and the staff are really nice.”
Eileen Norton agreed: “What a lovely place to dine for families and also people wanting a more adults only meal.
“The children’s entertainment area kept my four happy but more importantly the carvery was lovely, with a great selection of meats, vegetables and potatoes.
“The cake cabinet was amazing and the giant eclair definitely didn’t disappoint.”
