PERFECT FOR A GAL PALS GET TOGETHER
KAREN REGN hits edinburgh with her friends for a grown-up city break in the 'athens of the north'
YOU'VE probably toured around Edinburgh on a school trip or family holiday, and while perching on the Mons Meg may seem like yesterday, it's high time you got your gal pals together for a grown-up city break in the 'Athens of the North.' .
Edinburgh is a dream city-break destination. It's well within reach of Manchester and even if you decide to incorporate one of the the city's many cultural events (The Jazz & Blues festival in July, Military Tattoo or Fringe in August, Christmas, Hogmanay, etc.), you hardly need an excuse to visit.
Stay centrally If you splurge on a room off the Royal Mile, which you'll find a quick and easy stroll from Waverley train station, you can hardly do better than the Radisson Blu Edinburgh. In an excellent location convenient to Edinburgh Castle, the Radisson's recent multi-million pound refurbishment has helped it to deliver the three Cs - it's clean, comfortable and classy.
Customisation is key at the Radisson Blu, where you can choose from a pillow bar as you drift off to sleep, then delight in a tasty breakfast buffet full of variety the following morning, indulging in smoothies made to order, traditional Scottish classics like haggis, black pudding and potato scone and popular staples like freshly squeezed orange juice and eggs prepared just the way you like them.
The breakfast is also available to non-residents for just £17.95, the breakfast even boasts a whole side of fresh, locally sourced salmon.
I quite enjoyed the alcoholfree Bloody Marys in the morning, before trotting off to hear stories of bloodshed at Holyrood Palace, just a stone's throw away.
However there's so much more to Edinburgh than castle ramparts and murderous monarchy. After all, my friend and I are here to shop and eat - excellently and to excess.
Visit Stockbridge Our first such outing is to Hamilton's Bar and Kitchen in Stockbridge. Established in 2008, Hamilton's is informal, with a great mix of creatively named and expertly concocted drink offerings along with a seasonal menu. Those with dietary restrictions such as gluten intolerance will appreciate the care and attention taken, and staff are receptive to making recommendations and alterations to the dishes where needed.
Our chosen cocktails were the Birdman - an Easter island 'Tiki' inspired drink - and the Sloe Berry Simmer, which entails two kinds of gin and Prosecco, with an infusion of vibrant berry. The lunch menu offerings included crowd-pleasers such as burgers (and sweet potato and lentil burgers for the veggies) and dishes with a touch more refinement such as pan fried sea bass and moules frites, which are delicious.
Traveling into Stockbridge and away from the Royal Mile is well worth it. This affluent neighbourhood is home to the serene Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh with its impressive public display glasshouses as well as Stockbridge Market and the National Gallery of Modern Art. There are splendid boutiques to be found as well as outstanding food and drink venues, such as the aforementioned Hamilton's.
The West End A similarly off-the-beaten-track but characterful locale is Edinburgh's West End. For shopping, eating and a touch of pampering here, just head up Princes Street past the grand Waldorf Astoria (formerly the Caledonian Railway hotel) and you'll soon be soaking up the relaxed vibe of William Street and its ancillary byways.
A city break for the girls is nothing without a bit of pampering, and Charlie Miller, Edinburgh's premier hairdressers, has a branch here to make sure you're coiffed and looking your best. After popping in for a cheeky drink or two at The Voyage of Buck (which has a travel-themed menu), you'll be ready for a most girlie and sensuous private shopping experience at Odyssey Boutique. Proprietress and lingerie expert Sarah will tempt you with Prosecco whilst providing a fitting service. Sarah's flourish of lacy (and jaw-droppingly beautiful) undergarments will delight any brideto-be among your party, but the shopping experience is available free of charge for anyone to enjoy (call to book in advance).
To toast the success of our break from the mundane, my friend and I dined at the simply-named Dine. Walking to the restaurant, yet another informative jaunt, we passed through the Grassmarket district and into the heart of Edinburgh's business district. Near the Usher theatre, Dine is perfect for a pre-theatre meal, its gorgeous menu designed by Michelinstarred chef Stuart Muir. It offers luxury brasserie-style dining at affordable prices. The seafood offerings are particularly nice, such as the dressed brown crab served with wasabi puree and the tuna tartare with nam phrik, puffed wild rice and Asian salad. For mains, my friend and I can recommend without hesitation the spiced North Sea hake with curried sweet potato and the extremely delectable Gressingham duck breast with thyme jus, which simply melted in the mouth and was expertly cooked and presented.
Our city break in Edinburgh ticked all of the boxes for our girls' weekend away - glamour, delicious food and the feeling of being well and truly pampered. And best of all, a whole new set of Edinburgh memories made.
How to book A standard room at the Radisson Blu Edinburgh starts at £125, a superior room from £155, business room from £160 and a junior suite costing from £190, all prices are per room and inclusive of bed and breakfast. For more information or to book please visit radissonblu.com/en/ hotel-edinburgh or telephone 0131 557 9797. Radisson Blu Edinburgh, 80 High Street, Edinburgh, EH1 1TH.
hamiltonsedinburgh.co.uk, charliemiller.com, dineedinburgh.co.uk, odysseyboutique.co.uk, thevoyageofbuck edinburgh.co.uk
