Chinese Dragon Cafe opens newest branch in Nugegoda
Chinese Dragon Cafe Ltd., the leading Chinese restaurant in Sri Lanka, opened its eighth branch at No. 242, 7th Milepost, High Level Road, Nugegoda. The spacious new branch with great ambiance with conventional and newest Chinese cuisine will provide an unforgettable experience for people who yearn to sooth their taste buds.
The vision of Chinese Dragon Cafe is 'to become the preferred dining experience where we operate'. Starting with the Bambalapitiya branch which is one of the oldest Chinese restaurants operating since 1942 for 75 years, Chinese Dragon Cafe expanded to its second branch in Mount Lavinia in 2007 and re-launched it on Galle Road in December 2015.
Its third branch was opened in Rajagiriya in June 2010, the fourth in the Central Business District, behind the Dutch Hospital Complex in April 2013, followed by its head office in Hendala in October 2012, then the network was expanded with the fifth branch on Negombo Road, Wattala in July 2014, the sixth branch was opened in Pelawatte in July 2016 and the seventh branch in Nawala in October 2016.
Chinese Dragon Cafe serves its customers with the highest service quality whether it is dine-in, takeaway, outdoor catering or delivery customers. Currently Chinese Dragon Cafe is proud to have a network consisting of eight branches with their latest addition of the Nugegoda branch.
Chinese Dragon Cafe has an open ear to customers. Suggestions and critical feedback can be made by social media, email, call in or feedback forms and Chinese Dragon Cafe ensures that its team will get in touch with customers. Customers can order food online using mobiles or through the web by visiting www.chinesedragoncafe.com[http://www.chinesedragoncafe.com] which supports online payments and cash on delivery.
Chinese Dragon Cafe has an active Facebook page with over 155,000 fans which it uses as a communication tool to engage with its customers and ensure service levels are up to expectations. Chinese Dragon Cafe also has virtual tours of some of its branches using Google street view so that its customers can see the facilities before they dine in to give them a 'Meal to Remember'.
'Nugegoda location was chosen following our successful Nawala branch opening earlier this year. Nawala and Pelawatte branches are fully booked especially over the weekends, hence we are hoping to reduce delays for our loyal customers in the area who have given feedback on delays through social media including Facebook and other sources. The new location will help cater to many of the offices on High Level Road, students around the location, residential and walk in customers in Nugegoda, Kirulapone, Wijerama, Maharagama and Pepiliyana areas,' said Naishadh Udeshi, Managing Director, Chinese Dragon Cafe.
The goal of Chinese Dragon Cafe is to provide customers with freshly-prepared Chinese food at affordable prices giving them a 'Meal to Remember,' which is its slogan. Its offers customised Dragon packs and Dragon snacks starting from Rs. 50 upwards catering to all segments of customers.
Chinese Dragon Cafe has an extensive menu with vegetarian choices, fresh juices with no added sugar, milkshakes and iced tea and other items were added to the menu last year. Chinese Dragon Cafe delivers freshly prepared food within one hour. It has also implemented extensive training and development programs to improve quality, quantity and speed for customer satisfaction and this area is going to be its future focus.
