AN IDYLLIC UNTOUCHED PARADISE
DESTINATION HALKIDIKI
FACT FILE: Currency: Euros (€) £1 = €1.18 THE FLIGHT: EasyJet flies direct from Manchester to Halkididki. Flight duration is 3 hours 30, from £152.
TIME ZONE: GMT+2hrs BEST TIME TO VISIT: For pleasant temperatures, the best time to visit Halkidiki is between May to June and September to October.
VISAS, INJECTIONS AND PRECAUTIONS: None.
THE idyllic region of Halkidiki is an all-year round holiday destination that boasts an enchanting combination of golden sands, shimmering sapphire waters and lush greenery. Situated in the north of Greece, the landscape has a rare, untouched quality. There is so much more to Halkidiki than its laid-back beach scene - from kayaking into the sunset to exploring the surrounding forests and hills. The region is home to a number of small towns that offer their own traditions and areas to explore.
Must sees for free Hike up Mount Itamos in the Sithonia peninsula, which offers a stunning panoramic sea view. A number of companies offer walking or cycling tours to explore the surrounding forests and fauna.
Explore a pleasant mix of natural beauty and science at Aristotle's Park. The site honours the great philosopher Aristotle and includes a number of experimental instruments to try, making for an ideal day out for the whole family.
Tranquil and serene, Sykia Beach is a pleasant escape that captures the peaceful flipside to Halkidiki's bustling centre. Enjoy some fresh fish and a well deserved moment to yourself.
Top sees for a fee Go scuba diving in the Aegean Sea and take in the stunning vistas above and below sea level. The calm waters provide superb visibility, especially ideal for any first-timers looking to catch a glimpse of an exotic scorpion fish. Atlantis Diving Centre, located at the peninsula of Sithonia, is a great place for beginners and experts alike, with one-day excursions starting from €75.
Explore some of the history of Halkidiki at the Archaeological Museum of Polygyros, which has displays ranging from the Bronze Age to the Roman period, dating back to the 4th century BC.
Entrance is from €2.
Visit the Petralona Caves and delve back in time through the archaeological site, home to a 700,000-year-old humanoid and numerous fossils of animals. Children and adults alike will be left in awe. Entry is from €7.
Getting around The most cost-efficient way to get around the region is by the busses which run on an hourly basis - and more frequently during the summer months, however, hiring a car is the most time saving mode of transport.
Eating out For a sweet taste of the local delicacies, Lemonis Bakery is an ideal way to start the day. From freshly baked breads to scrumptious pastries and thirst quenching juices, Lemonis has plenty of sweet treats to offer. Enjoy the catch of the day at Sidera, a family-run seafood restaurant that serves up an array of fresh Greek cuisines in a prime seafront location. Take in the sunset while you dine at Ouzerie of Sani Beach Club. The beautiful, whitewashed building by the waters is the perfect setting to enjoy a spread of Greek delicacies.
Going out Navagos Beach Bar provides a laid back vibe as you sink your feet into the sand and sip a refreshing cocktail or two. Stay and catch the sunset at this lovely cafe-bar. This year celebrates the 25th anniversary of the Sani Festival, an annual cultural event that aims to bridge the communication barrier between locals and tourists through the language of music. Located on Sani Hill, the castle and views below provide the perfect backdrop to this event which runs from July 8 to August 19.
Compiled by Azkha Khokar How to book HOTELS: Luxury: Eagles Palace: As a member of the 'Small Luxury Hotels of the World', Eagles is as close to a palace as they come. It has a private garden, watersports facilities and live music every night. Ouranoupolis. From £158 per night.
MID-RANGE: Xenia Ouranopolis: For a view of the holy Mount Athos without the hassle of visiting (women are not permitted from entering), Xenia is a beautifully located beachfront hotel, providing great value for money. Each of the 88 rooms are comfortable and spacious and the hotel has its own spa and Mediterranean restaurant. Ouranoupoli. From £69.
BUDGET: Agionissi Resort: Situated away from tourists spots, this budget resort has a reputation of surpassing its three-star status, with its superb hospitality and relaxed nature. Visitors can make the most of its secluded location, private beaches, spa and gardens. Amoliani Island. From £52.
