In the lap of luxury
Groove like that
Almas, Night Club, Zirakpur
More About Almas: Pitched as the region's true-blue nightclub, this 6,000 square feet space promises to offer an international nightclub experience. Boasting of a capacity of 250 people at any given time, Almas interiors will surely floor one and all.
USP: European light and sound system, hanging LED Pixels, LEDs, Co2 Canons and DJ lasers controlled by MADRIX-the world renowned company synonymous with lights programming, and 10 teams of bouncers for security.
Speak out: Karandeep Singh, one of the three owners says, "Before opening this property, we went to some of the finest nightclubs in the country to do a recce. All efforts have been made to introduce the people in this region to a never-before experience."
Entry for two (couples only) Rs 3,500; At 409/12, level 4, Global Business Park, Zirakpur.
Grub of luxury
Habibi, Chandigarh
More About Habibi: With cuisines such as Lebanese, Moroccan, Frontier and Mediterranean, Habibi promises to offer an authentic palate journey to its patrons. No wonder, just within one month of its launch, the restaurant is already inviting people from across the region to enjoy its delicious delights.
USP: With an informal and comfortable seating, live acts on major days of the week and state-of-theart light and sound system, the restaurant aims to provide an unforgettable dining experience.
Don't forget to taste: Hummus Beiruty, fattoush salad, falafel, fatayer, manakish (Arabic pizza), shawarma, Moroccan tagines and the Arabic dessert Mohalabiya. Those looking for Frontier dishes must try raan-shandaar, kahsta meat ki tikki, and malai brocalli.
Speak out: "Habibi promises to be a game changer in Chandigarh's foodscape. With a culinary team specially flown in from the Middle East, Habibi is as authentic as it gets to dine in the streets of Beirut or Marrakeh," says Gunkaran Singh, MD, Rembrandt Fashion Hospitality Pvt Ltd.
Meal for two Rs 1,200 plus taxes; At SCO-14, Madhya Marg, Sector 26; Tel 8725003900
Steps to fitness
Engine Room, Chandigarh
More About Engine Room: Quite a rage among new-age fitness freaks, The Engine Room, co-founded by Kritika Sharma, who has been taking dance classes for more than five years and has done workshops with instructors like Leah Raphael Curtis, Nathanial Parchment, Akshay Sharma and Puneet Jewandah. Having taught more than 300 people, this 27-year-old young dancer feels that more and more people are divorcing gyms and now prefer to use the body and mind for workouts.
The elite thing: "Dance has always been for the elite and is increasingly becoming representative of high-end lifestyle. A lot of men and women from the well-known families in the region approach me for individual lessons," says Sharma.
USP: Kritika teaches varied dance forms including contemporary, hip hop and salsa. A certified yoga instructor from Sivananda Kerala (2015), her focus on improving fitness and flexibility of her students makes her immenselypopular.
Price Rs 3,000 per month; Contact shkritika10@gmail.com
Holidaying with class
Ranjit's Svaasa, Amritsar
More About Ranjit Svaasa: Housed in a restored and renovated 200-year-old property, Ranjit's Svaasa, a Boutique Heritage Spa Haveli in Amritsar, popular with both domestic and international tourists, offers just the right mix of old world-charm with modern amenities. Promising to take you back to a bygone era of plush British colonial architecture seeped in Punjabi culture and gastronomy, the eco-friendly property is a first-of its-kind with Vaastu friendly architecture, water-based chemical-free paint, solar thermal panels, rain water harvesting, pure oils and predominantly organic bath linen for the suites.
USP: Heritage property, facilitates various experiences such as authentic village tour, Amritsari food walk, community service activities, Punjabi cooking classes and more.
Speak out: Abhimanyu Mehra says, "Our endeavour is always to ensure that the guests have an unforgettable stay. Not only are they introduced to true Punjabi hospitality but also given a glimpse into our cultural heritage. This makes them come back to us again and again."
At 47-A Mall Road, Amritsar; Tel 09872626618
Draped in Punjab
Jaamawar Minx by Rupam Kaur Grewal, Pathankot and Chandigarh
More about Jaamawar Minx: Set up in 2008, this pure Punjabi ready-to-wear couture is all about elegant silhouettes-from traditional and contemporary cuts to fabrics. A kaleidoscope of colours and embroideries used form an integral part of brand Jaamawar Minx, which makes clothes for every festive occasion. Known not only for its ornate embellishments and intricate workmanship, the brand has also perfected tailoring and attracts a huge following.
USP: Not getting swayed by fads, this brand keeps itself focussed on Punjabi garments and ensures that their label always maintains the essence of this region.
Client base: Catering to diverse age groups and clients across the country and abroad, the brand will be opening more stores in India and across the globe, besides starting a manufacturing unit in Chandigarh. It already has two stores-in Chandigarh and in Pathankot.
Speak out: "I have always wanted the brand to be synonymous with not just luxury but also Punjabiyat," says Grewal.
At Elante Mall, Chandigarh; Tel 0172-5024888
Height of good living
Chandigarh City Centre, Zirakpur, Punjab
More About Chandigarh City Centre: Sprawled across 10 acres of prime land on VIP road in Chandigarh, the Chandigarh City Centre has become the address for stylish commercial, residential, office, showroom and professional suites. Despite the slowdown, the project has already managed to sell more than 70 per cent of its inventory. Top brands like Raymonds and Monte Carlo have booked space here. Extremely wellplanned, CCC promises a never-before shopping experience to people and luxurious work spaces and service apartments to corporates.USP: With an envious location, bang on the VIP road in Zirakpur, the Chandigarh City Centre adheres to 70 per cent green building norms.
Speak out: "Right at the conception stage, we were clear that Chandigarh City Centre must offer an international experience to everyone who enters through the gates," says Arun Jindal, director, Chandigarh City Centre.
At VIP Road, Near Metro Cash 'n' Carry, Zirakpur; Tel 09023490234
The art of pampering
Rejuve, The Spa The Lalit, Chandigarh
More About Rejuve: Established in April 2015, Rejuve, The Spa which is an exclusive-members only property, has in a span of two years managed to attract the creame da creame from across the region. With eight treatment rooms and a salon spread over 11,000 square feet, the wide range of services offered here include massages such as shirodhara, abhayanga, udwarthanam, pad abhyangam, shiro abhyangam, kizhi besides traditional Swedish massage, fragrant aroma therapy, deep tissue massage, Balinese massage, foot massage, hot stone body wraps, body scrubs, facials and more.
USP: Heated swimming pool, exclusive membership programme, unisex salon, hammam room, detox programme, bridal room, hydrotherapy, spa and beauty salon, yoga and meditation, including individual yoga, meditation space and a fully equipped state-of-theart gymnasium for those who are looking for destressing in absolute luxury.
Speak out: "We will soon have destination wellness programmes for maintaining physical, mental and emotional health of our patrons," says spa manager Krishna Semwal.
Price Between Rs 1,100 and Rs 7, 700; At IT Park, Chandigarh; Tel 0172-4447777
Shopaholic's paradise
Elante mall, Chandigarh
More About Elante: Not just a shopping area, the property, established in the year 2013, has over the years become a popular hangout joint for many youngsters and a landmark in the region. With an area of 1.2 million square feet, this vibrant and upscale shopping hub is part of a 21.5-acre complex which is home to 224 retail outlets.
USP: Elante has been a trendsetter in positioning itself as a happening one-stop destination for shopping, food, fun and entertainment. It is a mall that has something for everyone. Boasting of 14 anchor stores and 160 vanilla stores, it houses various Indian and international brands. The top brands at Elante include Hackett London, Zara, Marks & Spencer, Brooks Brothers, Rolex, Guess, Calvin Klein, Superdry, Tommy Hilfiger, Harley Davidson, Jack & Jones, Aldo, Steve Madden and Gucci, among others. The thriving office space in the mall complex houses big names like British Council, VFS Global and Hyundai.
Facilities offered: From valet services, shopping consultants, shopping bag valets, senior citizen zones, kids' play zone and crèche areas, free Wi-Fi connectivity, loyalty programmes and navigation assistance to 24x7 ambulance, the mall is constantly reinventing itself to stay steps ahead of the competition.
Speak out: Anil Malhotra, COO, Elante Mall says, "The most special thing about Elante is its surprise elements and its ability to innovate. We don't cease to amaze our patrons with our delightful offerings. We want every customer of ours to bump into something new each time they visit the mall. From five-star hospitality to elaborate F&B options catering to every budget, Elante is also a foodies' delight."
At Plot No 178 & 178A, Industrial Area - 1, Chandigarh; Tel 0172-4654482
Bejewelled
Anaha Kundan jewellery, Chandigarh
More About Elante: Established in the year 2000, Anaha Kundan Jewellery is the only brand that designs, manufacturers and markets kundan/polki jewellery in the region. They also do bespoke customised jewellery. Started by late Gurbans Cheema Gosal and now being carried forward by her daughter Simran Gosal Bhullar (48), Anaha offers luxury buyers a chance to work with designers to create something unique and exclusive.
USP: The designers at Anaha use 100 different gemstones inspired by varied art forms-from enamel work, prataksh nagashi, gold engraving on stones to chitri.Client base: The brand attracts patrons not just from Chandigarh, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Haryana but also from countries such as Canada, the UK and the US.
Speak out: Bhullar says, "We would now like to expand our new brand Sairah, which specialises in polki and diamond wedding jewellery, with focus on imbibing old heritage designs. Besides, we also plan to launch Viona soon-our new brand which is all about diamonds gemstones catering to an international clientele."
Price Rs 5,000 onwards; At Sector 34, Chandigarh; Tel 09855501827
