Jobs created as new Tynemouth restaurant opens
LEISURE
NEW jobs have been created through the opening of a new bar and restaurant in Tynemouth.
The Coast Kitchen and Bar has opened in the former Lui's Wine Bar and Bistro on Front Street, after the owners invested £50,000 into refurbishment for the eaterie.
Sixteen jobs have been created at the restaurant, which pledges to bridge the gap between healthy and indulgent food, serving fresh and locally sourced produce.
The venture is the brainchild of design and marketing executive John Sproats and his sister-in-law Rachel Errington, whose background is in the hospitality sector.
Regional chef Rob Arnold is heading up the kitchen following his return to the North East after a year in Vancouver, Canada, his menu taking inspiration from the west coast of America.
The venue's sit-in or take-out menu includes nibbles like seaweed salted organic popcorn, breakfast options such as smashed avocado and pickled chilli with a poached egg and sour cream served on sourdough bread, and heartier dishes including slow roast Crane Row Farm pork belly with white turnips, green onion and apple.
Mr Sproats said: "Our slogan is 'eat well, feel well, be well.' Coast Kitchen and Bar is not about making you feel guilty.
"It's about taking the guilt out of food with a menu where every ingredient matters and that everyone can enjoy whether you're a fitness fanatic, keeping an eye on your weight, want to eat more healthily, or just love delicious home-cooked fare.
"You'll still find hearty mains, fishy seaside classics, sharing platters, tempting puddings, seasonal salads, and blackboard specials.
"But there are healthy and energypacked breakfasts to start your day, bold and creative lunches that offer fantastic flavour combinations but are low on fat, exotic suppers packed full of fresh and vibrant ingredients, and plenty of delicious guilt-free snacks."
Mrs Errington said: "The idea is you can dine out with family or friends in a relaxing bistro-style environment and indulge while still being good."
Mr Sproats has travelled widely with work, including California, where he fell in love with the state's burgeoning fresh and wholesome dining out scene and when Lui's came on the market, he and his sister-in-law decided to open The Coast Bar and Kitchen.
Chef Rob Arnold joins the team after a 10-year career working at Jesmond Dene House, Irvin's Brasserie on North Shields Fish Quay, and alongside Michelin-starred chef Kenny Atkinson when he was at Rockliffe Hall near Darlington.
He added: "I'm hugely excited to be back working on the coast and to be in at the start of this fantastic new restaurant and bar.
"The focus is on high quality, healthy, home-cooked food, served with the minimum of fuss. I'll be keeping to the seasons and supporting local producers wherever possible."
I'm hugely excited to be back working on the coast and in at the start of this fantastic new restaurant and barRob Arnold
