Middle Eastern food on the menu at new restaurant
After years of hard work, the team behind Papa Ganoush are ready to add to Whitley Bay's burgeoning food scene
IT'S a big favourite at markets and food festivals across the North East and soon you'll be able to dine in Papa Ganoush's first ever restaurant.
Specialising in simple, fresh Middle Eastern fare, Tim and Tom Monkhouse started trading in November 2011 but have evolved the business considerably.
What began as a street food vendor selling at local markets is now a successful enterprise with food lines and stalls in Fenwick and on Newcastle Quayside.
Papa Ganoush was also a presence at last year's huge Foodies Festival in Jesmond's Exhibition Patk.
You understand you Now comes the next step - a restaurant which will open in Whitley Bay on Friday, March 2. Having built up a huge fan base, the father and son team have worked tirelessly for over six years to build the brand and reputation of Papa Ganoush. It is something of a dream come true. Tim had wanted to work in the catering industry after university but ended up in pensions and then social aren't you housing, where Tom also briefly found employment.
Twin redundancies brought the pair to a crossroads . Tim had been cooking Middle Eastern and Indian food at home for years and it was his daughter, Sarah, who suggested he should start selling it at street markets.
At the time, says Tim, Middle Eastern cuisine was under-represented. Truly a family-run business, Tim and Tom have benefited not only from Sarah's encouragement but from the guidance Terri, Tim's wife and mum to Tom.
As with all great creations, they have overcome many challenges and hurdles along the way.
Tim reflects: "It took hard work to get into some shows because many were reliant on burger vans and suchlike and were reluctant to try something new.
"Then we were invited to Boiler Shop Steamer and that was a catalyst for much of the street food evolution in Newcastle.
"But winning the Informal Dining of 2016 Award through Living North brought the most enquiries and opportunities for us."
Their success is not just down to the cuisine they chose to specialise in, but also in the quality of the produce and the way they deliver it from cooker to plate.
what Tim explains: "We make our own dough, rolling and cooking into flatbreads on the stall, and we cook the chicken and falafel freshly in front of our customers as we know people eat with their eyes."
stuff and whether Tim Monkhouse " The provenance of the food is always a key consideration and Tom says they use local suppliers wherever possible as quality is of the utmost importance.
Tom says: "Building a business such as ours takes time and dedication. You have to be consistent and understand the history behind what you do. Customers know their stuff and aren't fooled by poor food, whether you have a fancy truck or not."
The company currently employs six people, all working to service the growing number of bookings and events they attend.
The Papa Ganoush team set up a commercial kitchen unit 18 months ago and this has facilitated them to fulfil growing demands for their food. The street food side of the business, say the Monkhouses, will continue to grow alongside their new restaurant venture.
Tim and Tom were always interested in 'food on the go' and although opening the Park View restaurant will give them a permanent home, they want to emulate the taste and vibe that has brought them success on the street.
Says Tim: "The new restaurant has been designed to have an informal, friendly and family vibe, not a starchy threecourse dining experience - I guess an extension to our street food feel.
"We believe Papa Ganoush embodies unpretentious, vibrant food and genuinely great customer service."
The menu will be familiar to regular customers but will have some additions to build on the festival experience.
And as if the family didn't already have enough on its plate, Tim is also writing a book called Blood, Sweat and Pitch Fees in which he shares the trials and tribulations of getting an enterprise such as theirs off the ground.
Papa Ganoush, at 240 Park View, Whitley Bay, NE26 3QX, will be open Tuesday to Saturday, 5pm to 10.30pm. To book, visit www.papaganoush.co.uk[http://www.papaganoush.co.uk], email info@papaganoush.co.uk or tel. 07895 158796.
You have to be consistent and understand the history behind what you do. Customers know their stuff and aren't fooled by poor food, whether you have a fancy truck or notTim Monkhouse
