Diner added to delivery app without owner's consent; DoorDash has a habit of listing local restaurants without consulting them first
When a north Edmonton restaurateur discovered a website offering deliveries from her diner without her knowledge, she got to the bottom of it by placing an order - to herself.
Pamela Charlet was surprised Saturday morning when a regular customer congratulated her on finally offering deliveries through a website called DoorDash.
Only issue? Charlet had never heard of the service.
Not only that, but when Charlet and her husband Lyle opened Hathaway's Diner in 2006, they decided against offering delivery due to the restaurant's size and location, and chose to focus instead on the dine-in experience. Since then, the diner has become a Wellington neighbourhood favourite and Edmonton's top-ranked restaurant on TripAdvisor.
"I don't do deliveries because we're quite small," Charlet said of the 39-seat establishment. "To put delivery containers all over the place doesn't work for us. We put our customers in the dining room first."
Fearing an impostor was delivering dishes under the diner's name - the website used Hathaway's logo and a similar menu with several pricing errors - Charlet had her grill master and de facto social media manager Theresa McDougald post a notice on the business's Facebook page to say the restaurant has never delivered and to be wary of imitators.
Then, out of curiosity, Charlet asked McDougald to order a Hathaway's bacon and egg breakfast, through the website, to herself.
Several minutes later, the diner got a call for a takeout order from a number from the state of Georgia placing the same order under McDougald's name.
So, the kitchen prepared the dish with the same attention it would for a seated customer, packed it up, and waited for a confused Dasher, what DoorDash calls its delivery drivers, to show up and cop to the jig.
An American tech company that connects eaters with eateries, DoorDash facilitates food deliveries in cities across Canada and the United States through a mobile app and website.
First, users place an order from a list of local restaurants offering takeout in their area, then, DoorDash dials in the request, and assigns a driver, or "Dashers," to fulfil the last mile.
The company, which launched five years ago, expanded into Edmonton, St. Albert, and Sherwood Park in October 2017, offering deliveries from more than 100 restaurants. The only hitch is that not all the restaurants know they're on DoorDash's list.
The website lists restaurants from larger chains such as Tim Hortons and Subway, as well as smaller eateries.
But some, like LovePizza and Prairie Noodle Shop in Edmonton, have also spoken out against the tech company's penchant for failing to consult them first, and posted similar statements to their own Facebook pages.
"They really overstepped their boundary thinking they could just put my diner on their site," Charlet said.
How Hathaway's got off the app at thestar.com/edmonton
How Hathaway's got off the app at thestar.com/edmonton
