Grocers adapt to shifting consumer demands; Delivery options, in-store eateries only the start of a 'revolution'
VANCOUVER -- Canadian grocers doubled down on transforming themselves into destinations for time-strapped shoppers this year, ramping up delivery options, acquiring meal-kit companies and adding in-store eateries.
Shifting consumer demands and tech titan Amazon's recent acquisition of Whole Foods Market are pressuring grocers to evolve, yet experts say it's only the beginning of a transformation in how Canadians shop for food.
In the near future, consumers will order online on autopilot; shop at smaller markets bustling with experiences; and embrace in-store technology that eases the hassles of shopping.
"Fundamentally, grocery stores are still planned and built and managed and even measured from a productivity standpoint in the same way they were in 1917," said Doug Stephens, founder of Retail Prophet, an advisory firm.
That year, Clarence Saunders filed for a U.S. patent for "store equipment or furniture and a system for arranging" it to allow shoppers to grab what they wanted rather than be served from behind a counter, according to the patent application. His first such store, the original Piggly Wiggly, opened the previous year in Memphis, Tenn.
"And yet, as we all know, everything else around us has changed dramatically as a consequence of technology," Stephens said.
"So, I believe that we really and truly are in for a revolution."
Canadians feel increasingly comfortable ordering online. In October, retail e-commerce sales accounted for $1.6 billion or 3 per cent of total retail trade, according to Statistic Canada's most recent figures. That's a 19.3 per cent year-over-year increase.
That will grow even more as Canada continues to lag its southern neighbour in online sales, said Sylvain Perrier, CEO of North Carolina-based Mercatus, which helps grocers better use technology.
He anticipates a 2 to 3 per cent growth in online grocery sales over the medium term. Canadians will start to overcome the fear of having a stranger select their fresh food - a barrier that's hampered the growth of e-commerce in grocery - more broadly, Perrier said. That will come as the country's grocers get better at having good quality produce on hand.
Consumers are also creatures of habit, said Stephens, with about half of their purchases being the same each time they visit the grocery store. Shoppers will likely start purchasing these types of routine items online instead. With the increasing coverage of the internet of things, interconnected appliances will one day place those orders for their human owners, he said.
Those creations would be an extension of already existing smart refrigerators - ones that can show residents what's in their fridge and prompt them to order certain items via an embedded screen, among other capabilities.
Some auto-order products already exist. Amazon's dash buttons, which first required a human tap, now monitor supply levels in certain items and automatically reorder when the product runs low.
With more food stuffs ordered online, the centre aisles in supermarkets will begin to vanish, resulting in smaller stores that mostly sell fresh goods. These markets will strive to become destinations for shoppers, offering experiences to draw in consumers, Stephens said.
That trend is already taking shape with the rise of so-called grocerants, where stores offer dining options that, depending on the store, may include sushi, full-service bars and freshly cooked seafood selected from freezers in stores.
Stephens expects to see more nutritionists and nutritional information in supermarkets to help shoppers tailor purchases to their health conditions, as well as more chefs demonstrating how to cook specific food.
Technology in grocery stores will become more advanced and widespread. Electronic labels, for example, could automatically change an item's price based on demand or competition, Stephens said.
