Charleston bars, restaurants expect big crowds for WVU bowl game
While West Virginia University fans anxiously wait to see how the Mountaineers will fare against Syracuse in Friday's Camping World Bowl game, local restaurants and bars are preparing to serve them, win or lose.
"We're doubling up on staff, it's a real all-day affair here. We're busy for most game days, but [bowl games] and the Super Bowl are another level, said Robert Slater, manager of Cold Spot in Dunbar. "There's going to be lots of chicken wings. Lots and lots of wings.
Friday's kickoff will be at 5:15 p.m. and the game, being played in Orlando, Florida, will be aired on ESPN. Most area bars and restaurants open at 11 a.m., giving Mountaineer fans plenty of time to settle in before the game begins.
Lisa Shamblin, manager of Recovery Sports Grill, in downtown Charleston, said the restaurant's kitchen crew has been prepping hot wings and other game-day favorites since Wednesday to prepare for the crowd.
"We are packed and ready, Shamblin said. "We've already taken about 30 calls for groups larger than 15 people, so it's going to be packed in here, but we always have a good time.
Slater said big events like WVU's bowl game can be a major benefit for his business.
"It's about like taking a month worth of sales and doing it in one day, he said.
Many establishments are planning on having more employees on staff for the influx of customers. Shamblin said there will be a handful of extra servers on staff at Recovery, ready to help patrons - hopefully - celebrate a Mountaineer win, or console them with food and beer in the case of a loss.
Samar Poindexter, manager of Adelphia, in downtown Charleston, also said he'd have more workers on staff.
"It's a great atmosphere here for games like this, Poindexter said. "We're just making sure we have enough food and staff to take care of the people that show up.
Slater said dine-in customers aren't the only ones they have to prepare for - Cold Spot sees an influx of to-go orders on game days, too.
"That's the other side - making sure we get food out hot and quick for people looking to watch the game at home, Slater said.
WVU last played in the Camping World Bowl - then the Russell Athletic Bowl - in 2016, when the team lost to Miami.
Syracuse has won its last three match-ups against WVU. The teams' most recent face-off was in 2012, at the Pinstripe Bowl, when Syracuse beat the Mountaineers 38-14.
While Slater and the others are hoping for a Mountaineer victory on Friday, his main priority is ensuring those who come to Cold Spot for the game feel comfortable and appreciated.
"We have a lot of customers that kind of call us their home, so we cater to a lot of fans of the Mountaineers and we have a lot of customers that we just consider family, too, so we do what we can to make it a good day for them, Slater said. "We enjoy their company and want them to feel that when they come here.
