Phuket's most romantic dinner at Thavorn Beach Village Resort & Spa.(PHUKET)
A Unique Experience--Amy Bensema
Looking for a memorable dining experience while in Phuket? Today, we had the chance to dine at Nakalay Beachfront Dining by Thavorn Beach Village Resort & Spa.
The dining experience offers up the chance to enjoy a unique romantic beachfront dinner in an idyllic setting. Perfect for couples seeking a romantic evening by the sea, Phuket's Most Romantic Dinner.
Upon arrival, we were whisked away through the sprawling, verdant grounds of Thavorn BeachVillage Resort & Spa to an absolutely stunning location.
Set against the backdrop of the breathtaking Nakalay Bay, we were escorted to a simple, yet elegant, private candle-lit beach cabana.
Made of bamboo and draped in flowing white linens, the beach cabana oozed romance.
The sound of the waves lapping against the shore, the beautiful cotton candy sunset skies and the unrivaled views across the bay of Patong truly created a charming, cozy setting.
The arrival of the welcome drink set the tone for the evening as guests settled in, relaxed and anticipated the scrumptious meal to come.
Phuket's Most Romantic Dinner involves three courses. A fresh, crispy salad of assorted greens and vegetables served with a basket of bread begins the culinary journey. Judging by its freshness, it is easy to see that a lot of care has gone into the preparation of the food. The second course consists of the main meal and is based on menu choice--the Turf Side, the Surf Side or the Surf and Turf.
The heaping platter is absolutely tantalising and overflowing with choice cuts of meat which have been grilled to perfection, and succulent seafood specialities native to the region including Phuket lobster, and tender squid. There is enough variety on each of the set menus to really entice the palate and enjoy the diverse tastes. Dessert and a lush plate of sweet tropical fruits are served last, accompanied by perhaps another cocktail or strong aromatic coffee.
Each beach cabana is assigned a personal waiter or waitress who ensures all of the guests needs are met. Little touches like monitoring that water glasses are always full, rearranging the candles for more light, and a thorough explanation of each menu item really set the pace.
Phuket's Most Romantic Dinner is of very high standard, and the exceptional service only adds to the already out-standing experience.
Overall, the Nakalay Beachfront Dining by Thavorn Village Beach Resort & Spa left us spoilt for choice.
The fantastic landscape of the location really adds to the romantic aura of the candle-lit private beach cabana and the thoughtfulness put into the destination dining experience is truly special.
Phuket's Most Romantic Dinner features three set menus to choose from including the Turf Side, the Surf Side or the Surf and Turf menu. Each romantic dinner set is accompanied by a myriad of side choices including seafood cocktails, rustic baked potatoes, bread basket and sweet tropical fruits, most of which are native to Phuket.
For those looking to indulge in a bottle of wine, the nearby beach bar is sure to please with its outstanding wine list and variety of drinks & spirits to choose from.
Nakalay Beach Dining by Thavorn Beach Village Resort & Spa is excellent value for this type of unique, romantic dining experience in an exceptional beachside location.
For more information, please visit HERE.
Read more headlines, reports & breaking news in Phuket. Or catch up on your Thailand news.
By The Thaiger
