A head for heights
Iam well out of my comfort zone standing on the helipad of the 50-storey Shangri-La Hotel Doha in Qatar. The temperature is a balmy 45C with a strong wind whipping through the city’s glittering tangle of high-rise buildings and out across the heat-hazed sea. There’s no one about because it’s hot and it’s Ramadan and this five-star hotel, like ­others here, is in a sort of hiatus. Most restaurants are closed, many staff are at home and the bar has been packed away.
Outside this holy month, Shangri-La is one of the city’s favourite dining destinations, with seven restaurants and bars spanning the culinary gamut from Greek and Arabic to prime steaks flown direct from the Argentinian pampas, while the Chinese restaurant and Shanghai Club is so large it sprawls over two floors. You can even dine up here on the helipad where the kindly staff will set up a ­romantic picnic Qatari style, complete with rugs, bolsters and lounging cushions. Perhaps another time?
I’ve checked in just a day after the arrival of new general manager Ben Bousnina, a Shangri-La veteran of 15 years in Singapore. He’s here to broaden the two-year-old hotel’s share of the leisure market, and although we’re smack in the middle of the West Bay commercial district, all the holiday essentials are here, including a lovely lagoon pool set on a large deck landscaped with palm trees, ­24-hour health club and serene Chi day spa.
And the hotel is directly linked to a shopping mall and just five minutes from the waterfront, making it a good choice for a stopover if you’re flying to or from Europe with Qatar Airways.
The soaring building rises to resemble a falcon, a bird revered here. Inside it’s all about practical comfort and that pan-Asian plushness the Shangri-La group does so well, but with enough Arabic motifs to ground the scheme. The cool marble lobby is strung with contemporary chandeliers and set about with museum-quality art pieces; large portraits of the royal family hang in prominent positions.
This evening it is packed as locals gather for Iftar, the meal that breaks the day’s fast, with a huge feast arrayed like a souk in the ballroom; a Turkish ice cream vendor has ­arrived with his trolley from Istanbul and is dispensing sweets and hijinks much to the ­delight of the many children thronging about.
Upstairs all is quiet in the 272 guestrooms and suites. The 60 upper-level Horizon Club chambers are oversized and supremely comfy, kitted out in warm earth tones with floor-to-ceiling windows, signature Shangri-La bed, large TV, fast Wi-Fi, iron and ironing board (big tick) and huge marble bathroom with a tub set at the window.
The level 42 Horizon Lounge, offering breakfast, snacks and cocktails to Club guests, is the largest in the city with astounding 360-degree views. I tuck into a local breakfast of mezze, labneh and flat bread, while admiring the golden stock exchange building and the clear blue of the Arabian Gulf.
Cruising back to the airport after a flying 20-hour visit I’m struck by the mirage-like qualities of this desert city: the palm-lined Corniche; sheets of magenta bougainvillea draped over freeway walls; and mind-boggling architecture.
The incredible National Museum of Qatar, opening later this year and intended to ­resemble the petals of a desert rose, is ­designed by Jean Nouvel, the acclaimed French architect who conceived the Louvre Abu Dhabi. And as Qatar prepares to host the football World Cup in 2022 we can expect more architectural highwire acts, including a demountable stadium constructed from shipping containers.
Why not enjoy a falcon’s-eye view of the whole thing from your picnic blanket on Shangri-La’s helipad.
Christine McCabe was a guest of Shangri-La Hotel Doha.
CHECKLIST Shangri-La Hotel DohaConference Centre Street, West Bay, Doha. +974 4429 5000; shangri-la.com.
Tariff From $275. Horizon Deluxe King Room from about $400.
Getting there An easy 20-minute drive from Hamad International Airport. Bedtime readingArabian Sands by Wilfred Thesiger.
Stepping out Don’t miss the Museum of Islamic Art housed in a stunning building by Chinese-American architect IM Pei. Or jump a cab to the Souq Waqif, Doha’s oldest market, a labyrinth of covered stone passageways crammed with little shops selling everything from spices and textiles to gold.
Brickbats Forget your walking shoes; you’ll be dependent on taxis and air-conditioned spaces, especially during summer.
Bouquets Friendly, attentive staff, always ready with a smile, even after a long day of fasting.
Also try The Westin Singapore; Shangri-La Hotel Dubai; St Regis Abu Dhabi.
MORE TO THE STORY IM Pei’s magnificent Museum of Islamic Art in Doha, which opened in 2008, is home to a world-class collection of treasures spanning 1400 years. It houses more than 800 manuscripts, including a page from the longest poem in the world, the 50,000-verse Shahnameh, which took 10th-century poet Firdausi 30 years to write.
Another prized piece is a 7m-long Hajj certificate dated September 6, 1433, that proves a pilgrim named Sayyid Yusuf visited the holiest sites of Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem.
Apart from precious texts, there are ceramics, glass, metalware and textiles. If you’ve ever wondered what the inside of a 13th-century Mongol tent looked like, MIA has one, along with the oldest surviving astrolabe from the 9th century.
Coming up in November is the exhibition Syria Matters, which will highlight the country’s extraordinary cultural heritage as the tragic seven-year conflict continues to destroy its people and landscape.
But history is not the museum’s only drawcard. IDAM, Alain Ducasse’s first restaurant in the Middle East, is located in the heart of the building and offers spectacular views over the city, serving French Mediterranean cuisine with an Arabic twist.
Families flock to MIA Park, adjacent to the museum, to stroll the waterfront promenade and let their children loose in the playground.
■ mia.org.qa/enPENNY HUNTER
