Perfect Blend
Known for spectacular architecture and shopping malls, Dubai attracted more than 15 million tourists last year. Home to one of the world’s highest number of restaurants per capita, the city is also considered a foodie paradise with almost endless dining out options. It comes as no surprise that the city of glitz and glamour attracts celebrity chefs from all segments, though mostly to be assigned to the fine dining scene. One of the latest additions to Dubai’s hospitality landscape is Morimoto, one of 17 restaurants owned by Chef Masaharu Morimoto who is the face of contemporary Japanese cuisine.
Masaharu Morimoto, known to millions as Iron Chef Morimoto, originally had other plans than entering the culinary world. He initially envisioned a career in baseball but a shoulder injury ended his plans to become a baseball catcher in Japan. Morimoto then began following his second dream and started working at a local restaurant in his hometown of Hiroshima, learning all about sushi and the art of Kaiseki or Japanese fine dining. In Hiroshima he opened his first restaurant, at age 24. Five years later, Morimoto moved to New York, working for a series of prestigious restaurants such as the Sony Club, a restaurant for the corporation’s executive staff and visiting VIPs. In 1994, he was recruited to join the original Nobu restaurant by Nobuyuki “Nobu” Matsuhisa and was soon promoted to Executive Chef.
Cooking battles
After having first competed in 1998 on the Japanese television show “Iron Chef” he later became one of the stars of Food Network’s “Iron Chef America”. “The majority of my guests still think of me first and foremost as Iron Chef Morimoto, and I love that! It’s been over 20 years since I have been the Iron Chef and I am very thankful at the opportunities I’ve had”, Morimoto says today. His engagement turned out to be the springboard for an incredible career in the international restaurant business. In 2001, Morimoto opened his first eponymous restaurant in Philadelphia which was later followed by restaurants in some of the most vibrant cities such as Mumbai, Tokyo, New York, New Delhi, Napa, Honolulu, Mexico City and Maui. Morimoto Asia Orlando at Disney Springs opened in 2015, followed by Momosan Ramen and Sake NYC, Morimoto Bangkok and Morimoto Las Vegas at MGM Grand in 2016. Morimoto Asia Waikiki, Momosan Waikiki and Morimoto Doha opened in 2017 and Morimoto Dubai in 2018.
In terms of size, design menu and price level each restaurant is different from the other, but all teams use the same core philosophies which are the common thread to each restaurant. Morimoto says that he tries to deliver these core values whether it is a casual Momosan Ramen or one of his signature Morimoto restaurants: “When people dine at a Morimoto restaurant, we want it to be the best in category of whichever type of meal they are having.”
Bridge between Japan and the West
While the market for restaurants serving authentic Japanese cuisine today has become crowded in many parts of the world, things were different at the time of Chef Morimoto’s beginnings. Though sushi and sashimi were already popular amongst Americans, Japanese dishes incorporated lots of Western ingredients, partly due to local eating habits, partly based on which ingredients were available. Chef Morimoto is known for creating a bridge between the culinary traditions and ingredients from his native Japan and the West. Before he appeared on the scene, dishes such as toro tartare, tuna pizza, or crispy fried chicken with ginger-jalapeno sauce would have never been prepared by classically trained chefs in Japan. “The style of my cooking is rooted in classic Japanese styles and cuisines, but with my own signature twists I have added throughout my years of travel as a chef. I believe that Japanese cooking is both very beautiful to the eye and the palate at the same time”, Morimoto explains both his philosophy and the popularity of his native cuisine. The idea behind his brand: “We try to create a restaurant that follows my culinary philosophy and core set of values, then hire the staff that can deliver on our mission. Great food and beverages, exceptional service all inside a fun and exciting dining environment. Our focus starts and ends with the guest experience and how much being in our restaurant pleases them.”
Morimoto’s seamless integration of Western and Japanese ingredients and his glamorously presented dishes have received critical and popular acclaim. Around 15 of his dishes or some version of them are on the menus at almost all of his restaurants. Beyond that, the menus vary by location, based on local influences and preferences. Culture is very important to the chef when considering a menu for any of his restaurants. “I have 17 restaurants all over the world, and each one of them has its own identity within the city where we operate”, he says and points out: “I am very passionate about incorporating local flavor into my menus as much as possible, while still staying true to the dish that we are preparing.”
Tuna Pizza & Angry Chicken
Morimoto says he doesn’t follow food trends when creating menus but wants to stay true to himself and the type of food that he likes to cook and his guests have liked. At Morimoto Dubai, located on the 23rd and 24th floors of the Renaissance Downtown Hotel in the city’s Downtown district, the menu features signature dishes such as above mentioned toro tartare, which comes as finely minced tuna served on a specially created wooden tray with fresh wasabi, puffed rice, sour cream, avocado, chives, and a paste made with dried seaweed, or tuna pizza, made from tortilla (not pizza) dough, thin slices of tuna on top, garnished with red onion, black olives, tomatoes and anchovy aioli sauce, both dishes at around Euro 20. Other appetizers include Morimoto sashimi, a combination of seared toro, salmon, eel, tuna, hamachi with five sauces; oyster foie gras or sea urchin carbonara, udon noodles with veal bacon and crispy shallots on top.
Among the most popular entrées (Euro 32-60) are braised black cod with a ginger-soy reduction, ishi yaki buri bop, which is yellowtail on rice cooked at the guest’s table in a hot stone bowl, and – another dish that Morimoto is famous for – angry chicken, half chicken marinated in a spicy Indian-style garam masala with roasted peppers. Soups and Noodles (Euro 9-14), several wagyu steaks (Euro 65-90) and a wide variety of sushi & sashimi (Euro 3,50-8) as well as maki rolls (Euro 4.50-20) round up the offer. Chef’s combinations of sushi start from Euro 37 to Euro 112, sashimi combinations are available for Euro 46 to Euro 140.
Besides cultural differences, other factors are also to be taken into account when putting together the menu. For example, different from the Dubai venue Morimoto’s 2017 opened restaurant at the luxury boutique hotel Mondrian Doha features an open fire robata grill as well as the legendary Omakase menu (Euro 140), a series of courses selected by the kitchen which has become known as the best way to experience the essence of Morimoto’s cuisine.
The necessity for high-quality ingredients comes without saying. In Dubai - logistically well situated and reachable - the restaurant team has good access to ingredients from all parts of the world. Morimoto says: “We try to produce the best possible dishes we can, regardless of where we are. If that means the local product is what is best, we try to source and use it. Sometimes local doesn’t always mean better, so we take all circumstances into consideration for each specific restaurant we operate.”
Private labels
The beverage menu lists a range of zodiac inspired cocktails infused with the likes of wagyu infused bourbon, horseradish and parmesan cheese (Euro 14-20), wine by the glass (Euro 13.50-18.50) and beer from his Signature Series, a line of culinary-minded beers brewed by Rogue Ales in Oregon including Morimoto Soba Ale, Black Obi Soba Ale and the Morimoto Imperial Pilsner. The main focus is on sake, offered in different grades (Junmai, Honjozo, Junmai Ginjo, Junmai Daiginjo and Nigori) mostly by bottle (720 ml) at prices between around Euro 175 and 585. Chef Morimoto has also developed his own range of premium sakes that are produced in collaboration with the Fukumitsuya Brewery, a prominent sake brewery in Kanazawa, Japan. They include three aged sakes, costing as much as Euro 300-1,500 for a bottle of 300 ml. The chef is happy to have that many great relationships in the retail world and is proud to work with so many talented producers for my Morimoto branded lines. “My newest product is Easy Cup Sake which is something that I found lacking in the marketplace. It’s a premium sake product that comes in a 210 ml glass bottle with plastic lid so you can take it on the go, great for picnics and backyard parties.”
Morimoto is also working on a packaged instant ramen product that soon will be introduced in the US market. A series of high quality knives, Morimoto Edition knives by Miyabi, crafted by Zwilling J.A. Henckels, adds to the line of products as do two cookbooks with which he wants to inspire a understanding and discovery of Japanese food similar to Julia Childs with her classic on French cuisine.
Organic design with futuristic touch
The wow factor in Morimoto’s food presentation certainly extends to the design of his restaurants. When Morimoto opened his first restaurant in Philadelphia in partnership with Stephen Starr from STARR Restaurants Group, the duo hired star designer Karim Rashid who created a modern space combining traditional Japanese design with organic and sensual elements. The award-winning flagship restaurant in New York, designed by renowned Japanese architect Tadao Ando, surprises the guest with a wall made of 17,400 glass bottles that seems to descend from the ceiling like a waterfall. Morimoto’s interiors feel modern and chic while paying homage to Japan such as in Doha, where original artworks by Hiroshi Senju featuring waterfall murals transport guests to another dimension. Morimoto Dubai incorporates a 250-seat restaurant, a large bar area, three private dining rooms, sushi and teppanyaki counters and four outdoor terraces offering killer views of the Burj Khalifa. Geometric designs in light wood give a natural feel while furnishings have a slightly futuristic touch. First you eat with your eyes, Morimoto recalls the saying. “Visuals are very important in my restaurants and no detail is overlooked. Everything from the exterior signage to the individual plating is important and thought out carefully from start to finish.” Hard work, perseverance and absolute attention to detail are the key to his success, the chef is sure. Though he tries to stay involved in each restaurant as much as he can, he relies on his team which he sees as a representation of himself. Future plans? Morimoto just announced that he will be opening a Momosan Seattle, so exciting things are yet to come.
Bettina Quabius
Known for spectacular architecture and shopping malls, Dubai attracted more than 15 million tourists last year. Home to one of the world’s highest number of restaurants per capita, the city is also considered a foodie paradise with almost endless dining out options. It comes as no surprise that the city of glitz and glamour attracts celebrity chefs from all segments, though mostly to be assigned to the fine dining scene. One of the latest additions to Dubai’s hospitality landscape is Morimoto, one of 17 restaurants owned by Chef Masaharu Morimoto who is the face of contemporary Japanese cuisine.
Morimoto Dubai
Opening date 29 March 2018
Location Renaissance Downtown Hotel, Dubai
Design WA International, Dubai
Size 1,430 sq m (23rd floor) and 925 sq m (24th floor)
Seats 378
Known for spectacular architecture and shopping malls, Dubai attracted more than 15 million tourists last year. Home to one of the world’s highest number of restaurants per capita, the city is also considered a foodie paradise with almost endless dining out options. It comes as no surprise that the city of glitz and glamour attracts celebrity chefs from all segments, though mostly to be assigned to the fine dining scene. One of the latest additions to Dubai’s hospitality landscape is Morimoto, one of 17 restaurants owned by Chef Masaharu Morimoto who is the face of contemporary Japanese cuisine.
Morimoto Doha
Opening date 4October 2017
Location Mondrian Hotel, Doha
Design Glamorous, Tokyo
Size 800 sq m
Seats 184
Known for spectacular architecture and shopping malls, Dubai attracted more than 15 million tourists last year. Home to one of the world’s highest number of restaurants per capita, the city is also considered a foodie paradise with almost endless dining out options. It comes as no surprise that the city of glitz and glamour attracts celebrity chefs from all segments, though mostly to be assigned to the fine dining scene. One of the latest additions to Dubai’s hospitality landscape is Morimoto, one of 17 restaurants owned by Chef Masaharu Morimoto who is the face of contemporary Japanese cuisine.
Morimoto Restaurants
Facts & Figures
Company Name MM Management, LLC
Headquarters New York, USA
No. of employees 200+
Restaurants by opening date
Morimoto Philadelphia (2001, in partnership with Starr Restaurants)
www.morimotorestauramt.com[http://www.morimotorestauramt.com]
Wasabi Mumbai (2004)
www.tahhotels.com[http://www.tahhotels.com]
Atelier Morimoto XEX Tokyo (2005)
www.xexgroup.jp/en-morimoto[http://www.xexgroup.jp/en-morimoto]
Morimoto New York (2006, in partnership with Starr Restaurants)
www.morimotonyc.com[http://www.morimotonyc.com]
Morimoto Sushi Bar Boca Raton (2008)
www.bocaresort.com[http://www.bocaresort.com]
Wasabi New Delhi (2008)
www.tajhotels.com[http://www.tajhotels.com]
Morimoto Napa (2010)
www.morimotonapa.com[http://www.morimotonapa.com]
Morimoto Mexico City (2011)
www.morimotomexicocity.com[http://www.morimotomexicocity.com]
Morimoto Maui (2013)
www.morimotomaui.com[http://www.morimotomaui.com]
Momosan Asia Disney Springs (2015)
www.partinagroup.com/morimoto-asia[http://www.partinagroup.com/morimoto-asia]
Morimoto Bangkok (2016)
www.morimotobangkok.com[http://www.morimotobangkok.com]
Momosan Ramen & Sake New York (2016)
www.momosanramen.com[http://www.momosanramen.com]
Morimoto Las Vegas (2016)
www.mgmgrand.com[http://www.mgmgrand.com]
Morimoto Doha (2017)
www.morimotodoha.com[http://www.morimotodoha.com]
Momosan Asia Waikiki (2018)
www.momosanasiawaikiki.com[http://www.momosanasiawaikiki.com]
Momosan Ramen Waikiki (2018)
www.momosanramenwaikiki.com[http://www.momosanramenwaikiki.com]
Morimoto Dubai (2018)
www.morimotodubai.com[http://www.morimotodubai.com]
“I love being in my restaurants and talking to the guests. I learn so much about them just from spending a few minutes with them at a table, and that is really enjoyable for me. Without the guests, we would not have jobs.” Chef Masaharu Morimoto, Morimoto Restaurants Tuna Pizza Toro Tartare Photos: Hakan Akdemir
