Discovering the frozen beauty
India, June 1 -- A great vacation is one that gives you memories that not only last a lifetime, but is also life changing and a trip to Finland is one such adventure. Be it taking a dip in the frozen Baltic Sea, hugging the 'real' Santa Claus, chasing the Aurora Borealis, enjoying a speeding sled with Siberian huskies on a frozen lake, crossing the Arctic line, befriending reindeers or walking through the streets of Helsinki, Finland awes, mesmerises and stuns in equal measures. Bordered by Russia, Norway and Sweden, the Nordic country is an untouched natural beauty. The three must-explore regions in the North-European nation on your first winter vacation are the capital Helsinki and Levi and Rovaneimi in Lapland - known for its vast subarctic flora and fauna, ski resorts and natural phenomena such as the midnight sun and the Northern Lights.
And the fact that it is the happiest country in the world - according to the 2018 World Happiness Report - says so much about the Finnish way of life. Helsinki The moment you land at the Helsinki Airport, which is about 17 kilometres from the Helsinki City Centre, your eyes rest on the architectural marvel the city is. Finland has a strong design heritage, with several renowned designers, architects and brands coming from here, and this ethos is reflected well in Helsinki. An archipelago of hundreds of islands across the Baltic Sea, the beautiful city was given the City of Design Award title by UNESCO in 2014 - walk past the cobbled streets in Downtown and you will know why! The Finnish design is minimalist, but with a lot of detailing and the craftsmanship of the buildings is a perfect example of that. Some of the must-sees are the National Museum, Ateneum Art Museum, Temppeliaukio Church, Lutheran Cathedral and Helsinki Music Centre. Plus, head to the Old Market Hall to get a sneak-peek into the city's food culture. Tip: the area is best explored on foot. A slightly more modern addition of the design ethos of the city is the Design District Helsinki located in the City Centre. The epitome of creativity, uniqueness, experience and Finnish Urban culture, this buzzing district comprises of design and antique shops, art galleries, restaurants, hotels and much more. Pick a map and find your way through the best of the Finnish design and art and don't forget to bring some home. Helsinki is also a great place to experience the Finnish sauna culture. In case you don't know, there are about three million saunas in Finland - sub-zero temperatures make saunas a perfect getaway to relax with friends and family. Head to Loyly, on the beautiful Helsinki waterfront, for a one-of-a-kind experience. The exceptional architecture and unique location add to your experience here. And after you are done releasing all the toxins in the sauna, don't forget to take a dip the frozen Baltic Sea. The nerve-chilling combination of hot and cold is shockingly good. Where to stay Hotel Haven : Located adjacent to the Market Square, the hotel has chic decor with a modern twist. It is also a member of the Small Luxury Hotels of the World Chain. Plus, don't miss the breakfast here - it's elaborate and you'll surprised to see how quietly Finns eat their food. Hotel Indigo Helsinki Boulevard : Located in the heart of the Design District, the hotel comprises 120 rooms, all of which are decorated with works of local artists. Levi, Lapland The largest ski and recreational resort in Finland, Levi is situated 170 kilometres north of the Arctic Circle. As you drive through the snow-capped trees from Kittila Airport, you will be spellbound by the untouched natural beauty the region has to offer. Whether it is a gondola ride up the Levi Hill or a cup of coffee with marshmallows at the scenic Cafe Panorama Laavu, Levi is filled with scenes, which look exactly like wallpapers. Skiing, obviously, is a must here. From experts to those who know nothing about skiing, the bustling ski resort has enough to offer. If you are a novice, learn the basic techniques of downhill skiing from professionals. But if you are pro already, get your adrenaline rushing as you ski down the many slopes here. There are 28 ski lifts, 43 slopes (10 for kids), 230 kilometres of cross country skiing trails and two gondola rides here. Another major highlight of Levi is the Elves Hideaway. The magical village is where you get close to the wilderness and discover elves' houses and hiding places in the forest. There are hidden huts; Gingerbread House where you can try your hands at making gingerbread; and the Barn-Elf where you will get to know about some of the best herbal remedies. Plus, you can write letters to Santa here and be sure that they will be delivered. What stands out, however, on your visit to Levi is your hunt for the Northern Lights. Book yourself a guide and sneak out in the middle of the night several kilometers away from the centre to get a glimpse of this otherworldly natural phenomenon. As you stand in the middle of nowhere, look up, and if you are lucky, you will see the night sky turning into blazing colours. The months of September to March are the time to visit Northern Lights in the region. You could also sign up for aurora alerts on the Finnish Metrological Institutes' Auroras Now website to know the chances of spotting Northern Lights. An important thing to remember while you are out on this quest-of-a-lifetime is to cover yourself properly; it does get very chilly outside. There are also hotels from where you can see the Northern Lights from the comfort of your room. Plus, don't forget to carry a professional camera because it will be impossible to capture the Aurora Borealis on your phone. Where to stay Northern Lights Ranch : Accommodation here is offered in six separate Sky View Cabins featuring huge glass windows and glass roofs. Plus, there's a restaurant with a reindeer enclosure so you can look at reindeers while dining. Levin Iglut, Golden Crown : Resting on the fell slope, the glass-ceilinged igloos make your stay under the Arctic sky even more special. If not staying, you must dine at the inhouse Restaurant Aurora Sky - its views are splendid and food authentic. Levi Spirit Luxury : A combination of comfort and Arctic wilderness, these villas are as luxurious as it can get. Modern design and serene surroundings make them stand out. Hullu Poro Meaning crazy reindeer, the hotel is a couple of minutes walk from the Levi centre. The 157 rooms here offer breathtaking views. Rovaniemi We have all grown up listening to stories of Santa Claus and this is as real as it can get. The official hometown of Santa Claus, Rovaniemi is the capital of Finnish Lapland and is just a few hours drive from Levi. Get a genuine Christmas experience and meet Santa at his home in Santa Claus Village on the Arctic Circle - the village gets over 300,000 visitors every year from all around the world. Santa's elves will take you around the main building and tell you all that Santa does in a day and then, voila! You are face-to-face with Santa Claus, himself - this is exactly what dreams are made of... Don't forget to get an image clicked by Santa's professional photographer and get it on your way out. You must also check out Santa Claus' Main Post Office. Every postcard sent from here gets a special Arctic Circle postmark - it is not available anywhere else. Another picture-worthy moment here is crossing the Artic Circle. What's a trip to Finland if you haven't had your share of reindeer and husky rides? With Safartica, go on a short reindeer ride at a local reindeer farm and get your very own International Reindeer Driving License. Plus, feed reindeers and get to know more about their way of life and what makes them such an important part of the Finnish life. For those who love adventures, a husky safari is a must. You may find it scary in the beginning as the Artic dogs are generally very loud, but once you start, the dogs will calm down - they will enjoy the ride and so will you! Make sure you stop in the middle of the ride to get some photographs. If you wish to spend the day with these wonderful creatures, opt for full-day safari which is 60 kilometres long with a one-hour stop and soup lunch. It just can't get more exciting than this. Where to stay Snowman World : Make the most of your time here with a stay in one of the many rooms made with snow; even the beds are made with snow. Plus, you can drink at the Ice Bar, dine in at the Ice Restaurant and try some fun snow activities here.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from MillionaireAsia India.
