Whipping up new careers
Uni TalkPierre ViljoenProfessor, CQUniversity
Uni Talk
Pierre Viljoen
Professor, CQUniversity
UNTIL he enrolled in a Certificate III in Commercial Cookery, Luther Reginato had neither braised nor glazed a rabbit, but thanks to his CQUni TAFE studies, he’s now achieved both.
“Often described as a stronger version of chicken, rabbit has a slightly gamey flavour, so I chose to braise and honey glaze the meat to tenderise and sweeten it. I then added cherry tomatoes, asparagus and creamy polenta to serve,” Luther explained.
Luther is one of dozens of Commercial Cookery students who – under the expert guidance of teacher Glenn Davis – has been whipping up extravagant meals to sell-out crowds of diners at CQUni Mackay’s Fifth Floor Training Restaurant.
“Each week, I work with one of our Cookery students to create their very own menu and together we lead the class in our TAFE training kitchen to deliver the finished products,” Glenn said.
“From top to bottom, our state-of-the-art training restaurant mimics a real-world commercial kitchen to provide students with a real-life restaurant experience; our Cookery students prepare the food and our Hospitality students serve it.
“Diners are encouraged to provide constructive feedback to our students via customer satisfaction surveys that are available on all of the restaurant’s tables.
“Every lunch session we’ve delivered this year has been fully booked; so this speaks volumes about the quality our students are producing.
“Through this experience, all our students learn essential cooking skills, time management skills and they’re trained to develop a keen eye for presentation.”
Glenn described student Logan Allsopp’s menu as “well executed”.
“In particular, Logan’s Orange Glaze Poached Pears (served with toffee and fresh berries) were plated beautifully and received positive reviews.
“Being able to present the perfect dish is every chef’s end goal; we also encourage students to step outside their comfort zone and experiment with new dishes.”
Thus, when it came time to create his own menu, Mitchell Harding chose to tackle some out-of-the-box entrees including Kangaroo San Choy Bow and Otak Otak (red-throat emperor minced with chilli and spices, wrapped in a banana leaf and served on fried rice).
“I’d never cooked with kangaroo or minced fish before, so this was a great learning experience for me,” he said.
“Kangaroo is very low in fat, so the challenge was not to overcook it.”
Glenn said the knowledge and skills gained within the course were highly regarded within the hospitality and tourism industry sectors both nationally and internationally.
“A Commercial Cookery qualification provides graduates with employment and career opportunities to work as a commercial cook in outlets such as restaurants, hotels, clubs, pubs, cafes, airlines, hospitals, corporate organisations and many more,” he said.
“When they graduate, our Cookery students will be ready to take on the world – one dish at a time.”
In October, the Fifth Floor Training Restaurant (at CQUni Mackay’s City Campus in Sydney Street) is offering morning tea services from 10am to 1pm (dine in or takeaway) on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays. To place an order or book a seat/table, phone 4940 3391.
