Wild Orchid Restaurant
Since 1996, Wild Orchid Restaurant, situated in the heart of downtown Hamilton, is known as the longest-serving and popular restaurant in the area. Specializing in exotic Portugese dishes, this elegant restaurant offers you a charming and rustic atmosphere where you can comfortably dine with family and friends for any occasion, seven days a week.
Award-winning Portugese restaurant
Wild Orchid Restaurant is a proud recipient of multiple awards, including the "Best Seafood" category. Whether you want to treat yourself to lunch or enjoy an intimate dining experience in a serene ambience, Wild Orchid Restaurant is the perfect place to spend some quality time and enjoy a hearty meal in a welcoming environment while being served by friendly and courteous staff.
Authentic Portugese dishes
Wild Orchid Restaurant features a broad menu for lunch and dinner, along with delightful appetizers and tempting desserts. From salads to authentic entrées, hearty pastas and sandwiches, the choices are limitless. Dinner includes special meat entrées including rabbit, lamb, and succulent steak. Finely baked breads, nutritious salads, appetizers, pastas, and group platters are also served. They prepare the most delicious seafood dishes, including exquisite cod dishes. Finish off your evening with a light wine-either house wine, rose white, red wine, or champagne along with a specialty coffee and a dessert. If you are pressed for time, take advantage of their full takeout menu that will allow you to enjoy all your favourites at home.
Efficient catering services made to celebrate any occasion
Wild Orchid also supplies convenient catering for private and at-home functions for large parties up to 100 guests, with different sections to accommodate small parties in a newly renovated dining area. Their diverse and mouth-watering menus will spice up any occasion.
Book your reservation today and sample a nostalgic taste of traditional European cuisine. For more information, call Wild Orchid Restaurant at 905-528-7171 or email jorge@wildorchidrestaurant.ca.
Wild Orchid Restaurant is a proud supporter of the local art scene and other community initiatives, participating in monthly art crawls and the yearly super crawl. View their gallery.
Sidebar:
Visit our Profile Page
