Pub spy: Cheap and tasty meal at The Barn Owl
THIS week Pub spy made the wise decision to visit The Barn Owl in Warndon.
This might not be a spot for a posh meal but it is cheap and certainly cheerful. The owl is a lovely big open pub with big wooden beams, high ceilings, modern décor and a nice atmosphere. There is a very spacious and well maintained garden. Lots of people were outside enjoying the beautiful sunshine. The pub is definitely family friendly with lots of space for children to play outside.
The pub would be perfect for a function or a big family meet up as it has plenty of space and is close to the motorway. Not to mention the large and well tarmacked, clearly lined car park. The pub would also serve well as a venue for a kids party as there is a kids menu.
One of the best things about this pub however is the excellent value for money, and the menu certainly has lots to choose from. There is a vegan menu and a on Fridays they do a special deal of two meals from the steak menu and a bottle of wine for £20. All the beef steaks are served with chips, grilled tomato and mushroom, rocket and a mini mushroom and peppercorn sauce pie. Go to The Barn Owl on a Thursday and all burgers are just £5.
As I was driving, I went for a Virgin Sunrise Mocktail, which cost £3:50, and was very tasty. It does a range of cocktails too and the other drinks on offer are pretty good with a few deals on, such as two bottled beers for £5.
I ordered the baby aubergine, cauliflower and coconut curry, which came with rice. It cost £6.95. The portion size was perfect and the curry was really tasty and well seasoned. However it was supposed to be served with a poppadom but this was forgotten. When I raised it with the barman though, they bought one out straight away.
You have to order at the bar which is fine with me, the only downside was that when I went to the bar I had to wait for the bartenders to finish their conversation before I got served, it didn’t take long, only a few moments, it’s just one of those things that I find a bit awkward. The staff were friendly other than that though so I wasn’t spitting feathers over it.
My friend had the BBQ pulled pork hash which cost £7.95. This was roasted sweet potato hash with slow cooked shredded pork, red pepper, onion and kale in a sweet and smoky BBQ sauce, topped with a fried egg. This was also very nice and she was pleased that it was under 600 calories. There seems to be something for everyone on the menu.
The final bill came to a very pleasant £20.25. So cheap it made my head spin round. This pub proves that you do not have to break the bank to have a nice meal in Worcester.
Overall, I enjoyed myself, I thought everything was very well priced and I wouldn’t mind going to The Barn Owl again.
