LUNCH WELL AND PROSPER
Eating lunch at your desk is too often portrayed as something positive; as being the sign of a worker so committed to their job they are not willing to break for nutritional reinforcement. That needs to change.
It should be widely acknowledged that eating over the keyboard says next to nothing about commitment and productivity, and more about poor time management and an unhealthy office environment. On Thursday the Southern Cross Health Society, the country's largest health insurer, began a campaign to effect such a change. "Lunch Well" was launched with the not altogether surprising finding that a third of the 753 people it surveyed did not take a lunch break at all.
Those who didn't take a break reported lower levels of personal wellness overall, and rated themselves lower for sleep quality, eating habits and work-life balance. On the face of it, the link between skipping a lunch break and reduced quality of life is clear. Skip at your peril.
Southern Cross has a financial stake in keeping people healthy and, if its lunch campaign helps, that's a good outcome, regardless of the self- interest that motivated it. The benefits of nutrition and breaks are evident to anyone in the workforce and we're shooting ourselves in the foot by not treating them seriously.
Taking breaks allow you to reinvigorate yourself physically. Mixing with colleagues or friends during lunch can provide social interaction that benefits mental well-being. Eating regularly also helps keep your mood on the sunny side. Toddlers aren't the only ones who become irrational when they haven't had enough food.
It is conceivable too that, as Southern Cross suggests, a healthier and happier workforce is a more productive one. Which would be fantastic. New Zealand has a genuine problem with productivity, lagging well behind other OECD countries.
We should care because the link between a more productive workforce and a wealthier workforce is well established. Even if the profits of productivity gains are rarely shared in equal proportion with the workers who made those gains, increasing productivity is one way to help reduce inequality.
But we'd be kidding ourselves if we thought upping the ante on taking a proper lunch break will make much of a difference. The OECD has long opined that New Zealand's weak performance in the productivity stakes stems from its distance from its main markets, small population, weak capital investment and a lack of internal competition.
In a 2017 report it urged the government to adopt a number of measures to fix it. This included reducing barriers to foreign investment, lowering the corporate tax rate, giving councils more latitude to do what they needed to increase housing supply, and introducing research and development tax credits. It also called for a capital gains tax, which, though ignored in 2017 like everything else, might soon be addressed.
In the meantime, we should hope only that the Lunch Well campaign sees more workers take a proper, away-from-their-desk, break with the full support and encouragement of their managers. At the very least it will mean we no longer need suffer the heady aroma of our colleague's reheated fish pie, while catching up on emails. And that's no small relief.
