The Counter Custom Burgers Introduces A New Savory Burger, The Juicy Lucy
SCOTTSDALE, Arizona, April 2 -- The Counter issued the following news release:
- In addition, the award-winning restaurant will also feature a new Farm Fresh Salad
The Counter (www.TheCounter.com[http://www.TheCounter.com]) is thrilled to announce two new seasonal menu offerings. The Juicy Lucy Burger and the Farm Fresh Salad will be available for a limited time only.
The Juicy Lucy Burger features hot, melted cheese stuffed in an all-natural beef patty topped with caramelized onions and crisp pickles, smothered with tangy lucy sauce on a toasted brioche bun.
On the lighter side, The Farm Fresh Salad features tricolor quinoa, chargrilled turmeric cauliflower, fresh apple wedges, ripe roasted tomatoes and grilled onion rings served on top of arugula and mixed greens, tossed in a citrus apple vinaigrette.
"These two seasonal menu items are delicious in their own right but can be paired for the perfect balance of flavor," said Rachel Cohn, director of marketing for Kahala Brands, parent company of The Counter. "Whether you are looking to indulge in your burger craving with the Juicy Lucy or looking for something on the lighter side with the Farm Fresh Salad, at The Counter we cater to all lifestyles."
The Counter offers over a million possible burger combinations, including vegan and gluten-free options, with a choice from eight proteins, 11 distinct cheeses, 33 signature toppings, 20 unique sauces and 11 types of buns or fresh greens.
The Juicy Lucy Burger and Farm Fresh Salad are available now until July 1.
About The Counter
Founded in 2003 by Jeff Weinstein, The Counter's mission was to challenge the traditional burger joint. In partnership with Craig Albert, the Culver City, California-based brand grew into more than 40 domestic and international locations. The Counter offers a fresh, unconventional approach to creating the ultimate burger, offering over a million possible burger combinations with a choice from eight proteins, 11 distinct cheeses, 33 signature toppings, 20 unique sauces and 11 types of buns or fresh greens. The Counter offers a full-service, casual dining experience in an inviting space with industrial decor and upbeat music. Most recently, The Counter was acquired by Scottsdale, Arizona-based Kahala Brands one of the fastest growing franchising companies in the world with a portfolio of nearly 29 fast-casual and quick-service restaurant brands with approximately 3000 locations in 35 countries.
For more information about The Counter, visit www.TheCounter.com[http://www.TheCounter.com].
For more information about Kahala Brands, visit www.KahalaBrands.com[http://www.KahalaBrands.com]
Source: The Counter
