As testing lagged in rural Louisiana, 'serial killer' lurked
ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST PARISH, La. - River Road hugs the curves of the Mississippi River, past sugar cane fields and chemical plants, on the way to this semirural community 50 miles upstream from New Orleans. Epidemiologists believe the coronavirus quietly made this journey after taking root in the city during Mardi Gras in late February.
St. John Parish confirmed its first case of covid-19 - the disease caused by the novel coronavirus - on March 13, four days after a New Orleans hospital reported Louisiana's initial patient. Officials tried to act quickly. Parish President Jaclyn Hotard declared a state of emergency. The sheriff imposed a nightly curfew for teenagers, later expanding it to everyone. The local veterans home, where 144 of the parish's most vulnerable residents lived, had shut down to visitors the day before.
As the nation focused on the growing outbreak in New Orleans, the disease spread with especially lethal effect through its less populous neighbor. By early April, St. John - population 42,837 - had more covid-19 deaths per capita than any other county in the nation, according to Gov. John Bel Edwards (D), with a rate of 27.8 per 100,000 residents.
"We have a serial killer on the street that we cannot see," Hotard told masked reporters assembled in a parking lot last week.
With the virus's spread diminishing in urban hot spots, rural and exurban communities such as St. John are drawing more concern from state leaders. In some cases, limited access to testing allowed the virus to proliferate for weeks in such areas with minimal detection.
St. John residents did not have easy access to testing until April 15 - nearly five weeks after the parish's first covid-19 case - when two federal locations opened in adjacent river parishes. Across St. John, at least 768 people had been infected and 69 had died as of Thursday.
Among Louisiana's 64 parishes, St. John ranks sixth in number of cases but 14th in the number of tests.
State officials believe that a lack of testing is a major contributor to St. John's alarming mortality rate, which stands at nearly 9 percent. The parish might have many nonfatal cases that have not been identified, which could bring the mortality rate closer to the statewide rate of more than 6 percent, said Alexander Billioux, Louisiana's assistant secretary for public health.
High mortality also can result from having a larger proportion of residents with conditions that make people vulnerable to the virus, such as diabetes and hypertension - though Billioux says that cannot fully explain the discrepancy.
"We're concerned that we're seeing this outsized level of death because there's undiagnosed covid," Billioux said of the sparsely populated "river parishes" between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, of which St. John has been the hardest hit. "And that's the reason to surge testing capacity there. . . . Make sure that our rural communities, which is 80 percent of the state, are getting enough testing."
The virus's deadly impact weighs heavily on residents here. Madeline Jasmine, the only African American state court judge in the majority-black parish, spoke through tears last week as she detailed the virus's toll.
"We have a small church, and we lost our senior deacon, we lost our pastor's mother - and now my two sisters," Jasmine, 67, said as she sat on her porch, a scarf pulled over her face. Her three brothers and two of her nephews tested positive but have recovered. Just that morning, a woman on the next street had died.
Jasmine's family attributes the death of one of her sisters to anxiety over the pandemic.
"This is a close community," Jasmine said. "We know the Lord loves us and is not picking on us - but we want it to stop."
State public health officials have shifted some testing capacity from New Orleans to the three more rural river parishes. And through partnerships with community clinics, corporations and the National Guard, they have placed mobile testing units near small towns where nasal swabs can be gathered and sent to central locations for quick processing, Billioux said.
St. John now has seven testing sites, including one in a Walmart parking lot. Anyone can get a free test now, and some sites do not require people to have symptoms.
The state also is producing more of its own testing-kit components, including 3-D printing of nasal swabs at a Louisiana State University lab in Shreveport.
Louisiana has administered 161,000 tests statewide in more than seven weeks since the state's first positive case on March 9, according to the state health department. It ranks fourth in the nation for number of tests per capita, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.
During a conference call this week with governors and the White House coronavirus task force, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention committed to providing Louisiana 200,000 test kits in May, Edwards said Tuesday at a news briefing. The kits will help the state meet its goal of administering 150,000 to 200,000 tests per month statewide, which Edwards says is necessary to sustain a safe reopening of the economy.
James Comeaux, senior vice president of Access Health Louisiana, a nonprofit network of community health centers, said that "bringing [testing] sites outside of the city and into the rural areas is extremely important to provide that access for folks." He has supervised the testing of 216 people on a gravel lot beside a volunteer fire department in Wallace - population 707 - since early last week. Clinic staffers handed residents nasal swabs through their car windows to apply themselves and stored the samples in a cooler for transfer to a processing center.
The test site was set up on the Mississippi's west bank, the more sparsely populated and heavily African American section of the parish, as part of the state's effort to address racial health disparities highlighted by the pandemic, Billioux said.
African Americans account for 58 percent of the deaths statewide, despite being 33 percent of the population. In St. John, black people make up 55 percent of the deaths from covid-19 and constitute 58 percent of the population.
The agricultural west riverbank retains more of the parish's heritage as a sugar production hub and features plantation museums dedicated to the story of slavery. Chemical plants and an oil refinery provide many jobs, dispersed along both banks of the river.
"Every two to three days, we lose a few people" to covid-19, said Darrell Butler, a construction worker who lives on the west bank. "We don't know why it's happening to us."
He was relaxing with a half-dozen friends Wednesday afternoon, spaced a safe distance apart outside the Club Grocery store - a gathering spot affectionately known as "the Club." Butler had spent the morning helping pack 400 meals of red beans and rice, baked chicken and salad for a covid-related food distribution outside the elementary school.
Butler said he was glad for the chance to get tested at a nearby site the week before. His uncle had just spent 21 days in the hospital before recovering from covid-19, and his sister, whom he lives with, was still in the hospital with the disease after nine days. Butler's test came back negative.
"People didn't know it was as serious as it was, because they were still having the backyard parties," he said. "This is the country - you're used to cookouts."
Now, everyone takes precautions. Several of the men outside the Club were wearing masks. Butler said he was missing his because the elastic band had just popped.
Everyone, it seems, knows someone who has been hit by the virus. The hot-meal distribution had been co-organized by Ronnie Feist, president of the West St. John Civic Association. Feist, a nephew of Jasmine, had spent 15 days in the hospital, including nine on a ventilator.
Feist had been home for several days and was just getting his voice back when he launched the "motivational Wednesday" meal drive. He wanted to give residents a reason to come out and see each other - even if it was only from inside their cars - as volunteers in masks and gloves handed food containers through the car windows.
"We've been hit real hard," Feist said. "And for some reason, it's more than one in a family. I know of several families that have lost two."
His mother, Marion Jasmine Feist, 82 - one of the sisters Judge Jasmine lost during the pandemic - died while he was in the hospital. She was never tested and did not have symptoms when she failed to wake up from a nap. The family attributes her death to her fears about the virus that has invaded her family and her community.
Joslyn Jasmine Gastearl, 65, the second sister who died, was hospitalized on the same day one of her brothers came home following his recovery from covid-19. Gastearl suddenly had trouble moving and couldn't talk to relatives. The hospital told the family she tested positive for covid-19.
"We have been working our brains" to figure out how the virus penetrated the family, said Judge Jasmine, who tested negative when she came down with a fever shortly before her younger sister fell ill. "This is going to end soon, hopefully - but it's not going to end for us," she said, thinking of those who have died.
The Southeast Louisiana Veterans Home - a residential nursing center in the east-bank community of Reserve - has been ground zero for St. John's outbreak. Subtracting the cases of infected veterans, the parish's mortality rate falls closer to the state average, though still higher than the national average.
Residents' relatives say they can't understand how the virus became so rampant in the home - 79 positive cases, 26 deaths, 20 staffers infected - when three of the state's other veterans homes had no positive cases and the fourth had only one.
"How negligent was the nursing home so that that number of people could get infected with coronavirus?" said Neal Hebert, whose father, Berlin Hebert Jr., died of covid-19 at the home April 3. "He couldn't move well enough to touch anyone else," he said. "So if my dad caught it, everyone must have been exposed."
Lack of testing may have obscured the extent to which the virus was taking over the veterans home in the early days of the pandemic. The first veteran tested positive on March 23 - 11 days after the home had closed to visitors.
Six days later, Barbara Serpas received a call from the home informing her that her father, Raymond Doran, 98, had died. Serpas suspected covid-19, calling her father's health previously "perfectly fine."
She asked for a posthumous test for her father, who had repaired B-24 bombers during World War II, but she said the veterans home and the parish coroner turned her away. She then approached the coroner in another parish, where the funeral home handling the burial was located, to ask for a test. The result was positive for covid-19.
"I just wanted to know: What did my daddy pass away from?" Serpas said. "I would always be wondering if I didn't have him tested."
Julie Baxter Payer, deputy secretary of the Louisiana Department of Veterans Affairs, said she could not comment on specific cases but noted that coronavirus tests were more scarce in the early days of the pandemic and that the rules for who got tested were more strict - symptoms had to be present and tests could be done only in hospitals, for instance. But she emphasized that whenever a doctor ordered a test for a patient, the home made sure a test was administered.
Now, tests are more plentiful. All of the residents have been tested at least once, and last week, the home secured enough kits to have 57 patients tested for a second time, Payer said.
Joey Strickland, the state secretary of veterans affairs and a Vietnam veteran, said in an interview that the sickness and death at the home "just tears my guts out." But he defended his agency's handling of the crisis. He said CDC guidelines were closely followed once the outbreak was detected, including measures such as quarantining, screening for symptoms and extensive sanitizing.
One of the home's earliest precautionary measures - shutting down visits - had the consequence of cutting families off from dying loved ones.
Neal Hebert, who teaches high school theater in Baton Rouge, had not been able to visit his father since the beginning of March, though they talked on the phone. On each of the first two days that the coronavirus was detected at the home, Hebert received notifications from his father's nurse. He asked whether his father was going to be tested.
"I was told there was no reason to give him a test," Herbert recalled.
On the third day, March 25, he received another call: This time, the nurse told him his father was suddenly very sick with covid-19 symptoms and needed to be hospitalized.
Berlin Hebert Jr., a 74-year-old cat lover who lost his leg to a land mine in Vietnam, hung on until April 3. A few days before, when all medical hope was lost and the old soldier had been moved back to the veterans home to die while under palliative care, the nurse called the son one more time.
"She said, 'Your dad just got back here, and I don't think he's going to live until hospice gets there,' " Neal Hebert recalled. "So she asked me if I'd talk to him over her cellphone and tell him goodbye."
The nurse held the phone where the veteran might hear his only child's voice: "Dad, I love you. You don't have to hold on anymore. . . . It's going to be okay."
The son could hear his father making sounds, struggling to speak, unable to form words. And he could hear the nurse sobbing.
david.montgomery@washpost.com
Julie Tate in Washington contributed to this report.
