Crush of New Patients Is Slowing in New York, But Deaths Peak Again
The number of coronavirus patients in the state's hospitals rose by only 200, the smallest one-day increase since restrictions began.
The number of patients hospitalized with the coronavirus in New York State rose on Wednesday by only 200 from the previous day, officials said on Thursday, the smallest increase since before the imposition of a statewide lockdown and another promising sign that the government's measures may have started working.
But even as the flow of infected people into emergency rooms appeared to level out, more than 18,000 ailing patients -- nearly equal to the capacity of Madison Square Garden -- were still packed into New York's hospitals, and the daily death toll was near 800 for the second day in a row, bringing the state's total fatalities to more than 7,000.
For the better part of a month, the residents of New York, which has more than one-third of the total cases in the United States and more cases than any other country, have pored over data on the outbreak, trying to determine if the curve of new infections had finally been flattened and if the apex of the crisis had been reached.
While elected officials warned on Thursday that no one -- not even the analysts who had built the statistical models -- could perfectly predict what was ahead, there were fragile indications of good news on the ground as doctors in New York said the crush of new patients had started to slow down and the atmosphere of panic in their hospitals had begun to subside.
''Hope is gaining a bit of an upper hand,'' Vicki L. LoPachin, the chief medical officer of the Mount Sinai Health System, wrote in an email to the staff on Thursday morning. ''Social distancing efforts are working, our inpatient volumes have stabilized, and on one single day this week, 167 Covid-19 patients were discharged from our hospitals.''
Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey cited similar progress in the fight against the virus in his own state, which trailed only New York in the total number of cases. Even as Mr. Murphy reported on Thursday that another 198 people in the state had died, the number of patients on ventilators dropped by almost 2 percent, to 1,551 from 1,576, an indicator that the curve of the infection was flattening.
Mr. Murphy's New York counterpart, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, welcomed these developments at his daily briefing with a tone of wary optimism. But, as he has done over and over in recent days, Mr. Cuomo warned against complacency and insisted that whatever limited progress the state had made would only continue if New Yorkers stayed the course -- and stayed away from one another.
Grappling with the question of when to lift public health restrictions and restart the state's economy, Mr. Cuomo noted that would only happen by ''increasing our testing capacity,'' an effort that will most likely require significant federal assistance. Unlike some other leaders, Mr. Cuomo has refused to set a specific date for easing the government's measures, admitting that even the experts cannot offer ironclad forecasts of the future.
''Who can look forward and say where we're going to be in three to four weeks?'' he said, adding, ''The smartest person will start by saying 'I don't know.'''
Still, the data Mr. Cuomo offered on Thursday gave some reasons for hope.
One day last week, for example, the number of people hospitalized with the virus in New York rose by a bruising 1,427, or 11 percent. By contrast, the most recent net gain of 200 -- meaning 200 more people were admitted with coronavirus symptoms than the number who left -- was just a 1 percent increase from the previous day.
There were also decreases in the number of new patients admitted to intensive care this week and in the amount of people who required emergency intubations.
But deaths -- considered a lagging indicator that will be among the last statistics to drop -- have not yet relented in New York, where 799 people died on Wednesday. For days, hospital and public morgues have been approaching their capacities.
There are now so many people dying in private homes that soldiers and members of the National Guard have started to haul the bodies out in rented vans.
On Wednesday night, the New York City Medical Reserve Corps sent out an email calling for ''strong, willing'' volunteers to serve as ''body handlers'' to tag and store dead bodies in refrigerated trailers. On Thursday morning, Mr. Cuomo said he would authorize out-of-state funeral directors to practice in New York to alleviate the burden on their overworked colleagues.
''If you ever told me that as governor I would have to take these actions,'' he said, ''I couldn't even contemplate where we are now.''
Mr. Cuomo has long described New York's hospitals as the front lines in the fight against the virus, and while the pressure was starting to ease at some, others continued to face strains.
At Elmhurst Hospital Center, a hard-hit public hospital in Queens, daily deaths from the virus have been in the double digits, with more than 20 people dying on Monday alone. The number of infected patients arriving at Elmhurst has sharply declined in recent days, doctors said, but the percentage of those coming in extremely sick and requiring oxygen has gone up.
At Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center, a safety net hospital in Brooklyn, two doctors said the situation remained overwhelming on Thursday. Many workers at Brookdale have called out sick, and the reduced staffing levels have led to dangerous conditions.
On one recent overnight shift, more than 15 nurses did not show up for work, leaving only five to handle the emergency room, one doctor said. Intubated patients -- some of the most vulnerable in the hospital -- were sometimes left alone, the other said. Both declined to be identified because they were not authorized to speak publicly. Brookdale officials did not respond to a request for comment on their staffing levels.
Patients have continued pouring into the NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital system, where officials said they planned to work with the military to create new field hospitals in Upper Manhattan to accommodate up to 350 people.
Most of the new beds were set to open next week under a mechanically inflated bubble and a nearby training center at Columbia University's athletic facility, said Joe Ienuso, NewYork-Presbyterian's senior vice president for facilities and real estate. The rest would be in a conference room area at the Milstein Hospital Building at 168th Street, starting at the end of this week.
Only days ago, St. Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx had been dealing with a ''waterfall'' of gasping new patients, said Dr. Daniel G. Murphy, the chairman of the emergency medicine department. But by Thursday, Dr. Murphy said, the number of infected people coming in had slowed down to something that was more like a ''low-volume creek.''
The staff at Mount Sinai South Nassau, a hospital in Oceanside on Long Island, devised its own method for marking good news. Every time a patient infected with the virus recovers and goes home, ''Here Comes the Sun'' is played on the public address system.
By Thursday evening, the old Beatles number had been blasted overhead 245 times.
Reporting was contributed by Nicole Hong, Jesse McKinley, Sharon Otterman, William K. Rashbaum, Brian Rosenthal, Michael Rothfeld and Tracey Tully.
