Coronavirus Update
Italy adapted to life under a nationwide lockdown on Tuesday, and, in New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo created a one-mile ''containment zone'' in a suburb of New York City.
It was a day when officials moved to keep people away from places hit hard by the coronavirus. In the United States, leaders of the nursing home industry recommended against visiting nursing homes unless absolutely necessary. In offices, there were empty cubicles, as more workers performed their jobs from home. Walmart, the nation's largest employer, announced that workers would continue to be paid if they came down with the coronavirus or had to be quarantined.
There were more face masks on buses and subways, smaller crowds on sidewalks and shorter waits in restaurants. Some people tried to change in their routines in the smallest of ways, punching the buttons in elevators with a knuckle instead of a fingertip.
Mr. Cuomo ordered the ''containment zone'' for New Rochelle, N.Y., which he said had ''probably the largest cluster of these cases in the United States.'' The New York region recorded its first death: a 69-year-old New Jersey man who had not traveled outside the country, according to the New Jersey health commissioner, Judith Persichilli.
President Trump again played down the threat of the virus, which had killed 29 people in the U.S., declaring that the epidemic ''will go away.'' More than 800 cases of coronavirus have been reported in the United States, including 29 deaths.
The recommendation that American nursing homes bar nonessential visitors followed an outbreak of the virus around Seattle. Five long-term care facilities there have been hit with cases, including one in Kirkland, Wash., where 18 residents have died.
''The mortality rate is shocking,'' declared Mark Parkinson, president and chief executive officer of the American Health Care Association. He said that the death rate might exceed the 15 percent reported in China for people over the age of 80 who become infected.
Dr. David Gifford, the health care association's chief medical officer, said staff members should be asked, ''Do you need to be in-building to operate?''
Elsewhere, Panama confirmed its first case, a 40-year-old woman who returned on Sunday from a trip to Madrid. And with Cyprus confirming two infections, every country in the European Union has been hit.
Among nations, however, the strategies for combating the infection, or at least stifling its relentless sweep, varied. Austria restricted access at its border with Italy. Greece and the Czech Republic ordered schools and universities closed, though each country's caseload is in the dozens, far fewer than some of their neighbors. Spain, coping with one of the largest outbreaks, shuttered educational centers in the Madrid region, but not nationwide.
Wall Street rebounded from its plunge of Monday, with the S&P 500 surging nearly 5 percent and recouping more than half of Monday's losses. But some executives were less worried about factory shutdowns and supply-chain disruptions in China than about goods going unsold once they reached the United States. Jay Foreman, chief executive of the toy company behind the Tonka Trucks, Lite-Brite and Tinkertoy brands, fretted that consumers would ''decide the only thing they're buying is hand sanitizer and Wet Wipes and Campbell's Soup, and they're not spending any money.''
China's president, Xi Jinping, visited Wuhan, the industrial city in central China where the outbreak began. The visit by Mr. Xi, who has faced criticism at home and abroad for early delays that compounded the outbreak, was clearly intended to send a signal that Beijing believes the worst could soon be over in China. Thousands of Chinese employees have returned to work, but with new routines. They now wear face masks, and during their lunch breaks they are instructed not to face each other while eating.
But as rank-and-file workers are back on the job, some military and political leaders are coming down with the virus. Poland's top army commander, Gen. Jaroslaw Mika, was found to have it after he returned from a meeting in Germany. Many other officials are in self-isolation after possible exposure, including President Trump's new chief of staff, Mark Meadows; the German interior minister; and the Norwegian defense minister. One house of the Spanish parliament canceled its proceedings for a week after a lawmaker tested positive.
More schools closed in order to reduce the possible spread of the virus. Greece and the Czech Republic announced that all schools and universities would do so, though each country's caseload is in the dozens, far fewer than some of their neighbors. Spain, which is coping with one of the largest outbreaks, closed all educational centers around Madrid, but not elsewhere.
In Italy, where Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte essentially adopted China's playbook for containing the virus after more than 9,000 cases and nearly 500 deaths, travel was allowed for the purpose of going to work, going to a doctor's office or a hospital, or buying food and supplies. The Italian news agency ANSA reported that people had to wait as long as an hour to enter supermarkets in Naples. Part of the problem was a mandate that people stand about three feet apart.
Several airlines on Tuesday suspended flights to and from Italy, among them the Spanish carriers Iberia and Vueling. British Airways also halted flights, as did Ryanair. The Italian airline Alitalia said it would continue service but offered to let passengers rebook or reroute their flights without penalties.
But Italian doctors noted a milestone when they moved a 38-year-old man out of intensive care at the San Matteo hospital in Pavia. He was believed to be the first Italian to have contracted the coronavirus, having been tested on Feb. 21, three days after he went to the hospital in Codogno with flulike symptoms. He was initially sent home but returned on Feb. 19, complaining that he was sicker. He was tested only when doctors learned that in early February he had met with a man who had visited China.
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
