New York Women Weigh Admiration for Cuomo Against Allegations
In a state still just teetering toward normalcy, women met the news of the resignation with sometimes warring impulses.
As the pandemic unfolded and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/10/nyregion/cuomo-investigation-testimony.html] gave daily televised updates, issued mask mandates and imposed lockdown measures to slow the spread of the coronavirus, Marybel Hoyos, a homemaker from Long Island, followed with approval.
On Tuesday, she was following again as the governor announced his imminent resignation[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/10/nyregion/andrew-cuomo-resigns.html] after a report found he had sexually harassed 11 women[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/03/nyregion/cuomo-biden-sexual-harassment.html] — this time grappling with her admiration of the man and rage at his behavior.
“As a mother, as a woman, as a daughter, that is not acceptable,” said Ms. Hoyos, 59, from Jericho. “I was very disappointed, because he was a very good leader. But it’s not inseparable to me, as a woman, if something was wrong.”
For New York women, residents of a state still just teetering toward normalcy, news of Mr. Cuomo’s resignation was met with different, sometimes warring impulses. Revered by many for his steady, if imperious, stewardship during the pandemic, his swift defenestration seemed to some unfair, an overreaction to behavior many women routinely feel they must brush off in the workplace. To other women, the governor’s denouement was a victory, proof of the durability of the Me Too era[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/11/us/politics/andrew-cuomo-feminism-womens-rights.html], driving home a point that no one — and no man — is beyond reproach.
“Being a good governor isn’t enough. You have to be a good person,” said Heather Craig, 58, a senior director at an energy company who lives in Buffalo. “He thought he was exempt from repercussions — just like all the men who have been called out during the Me Too movement.”
Via his televised pandemic addresses, the governor entered people’s homes at a time when they were most vulnerable, providing essential information about the virus (though the F.B.I. is investigating[https://www.nytimes.com/article/andrew-cuomo-nursing-home-deaths.html] whether his administration hid the full number of deaths in nursing homes).
The appearances were interspersed with glimpses of his own vulnerability — he shared anecdotes about his mother and three daughters muddling through lockdown life — a humanizing element for a forceful leader that elevated Mr. Cuomo to a national name, and earned him a more than $5 million deal for a book on leadership[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/10/books/cuomo-book-penguin-random-house.html].
Against that backdrop, the rapid fall of the three-term governor, for whom a fourth term until only recently seemed a sure bet, has been that much more upending — and perhaps nowhere more so than among the women of New York.
In a report from the state attorney general[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/04/nyregion/andrew-cuomo-future-takeaways.html] that was released last week, nearly a dozen women described Mr. Cuomo commenting on their appearance, touching their bodies and asking sexualized questions. One woman, a state trooper assigned to his protective detail, said he ran his finger down her neck, and another, an executive assistant, accused the governor of groping her[https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/08/nyregion/cuomo-executive-assistant-sexual-harassment.html] in the Executive Mansion.
In his public address announcing his resignation on Tuesday, Mr. Cuomo said he took “full responsibility” for his behavior, but denied ever touching any woman inappropriately.
“In my mind, I have never crossed the line with anyone,” Mr. Cuomo said. “But I didn’t realize the extent to which the line has been redrawn.”
Around the state, women like Ms. Hoyos were weighing their admiration for a governor they came to rely on at a perilous time against the accusations he is facing and their own lived experiences of sexual harassment and unwanted advances, indignities that still seem endemic to navigating the world while female.
“In the government, there are a lot of strong, powerful women, and to make them feel degraded, or anything less of what he was, is disgusting,” said Destiny Russo, 27, who works at a restaurant in Manhattan’s West Village.
Ms. Russo said she empathized with the women who have come forward because she has experienced similar harassment from men she had thought were platonic friends. “And if it’s your boss and you’re feeling pressured, and you’re like, ‘I can’t say anything?’ I could never even imagine,” she said.
Adrienne Tulet, 31, from Prospect Heights in Brooklyn, also said she identified with Mr. Cuomo’s accusers, via the everyday humiliations experienced by women in the workplace. At her former job, a male colleague routinely called female workers “sweetheart,” she said. At the food market where she works, she bristles at men who tell her to “smile more.”
“There’s been a change in what’s tolerated,” Ms. Tulet said. “You hear men say, ‘I’m afraid to go to work now.’ And I think, ‘Cool, watch “Mad Men”— back then women had a real reason to be afraid at work.’”
Tyler Moses, 23, a tutor and law student from Park Slope in Brooklyn, said that while she felt Mr. Cuomo’s resignation was a victory, its fruits were unevenly distributed: those accusers of the governor who have been publicly identified are all white; Ms. Moses said she feels like the Me Too movement has in some cases left out Black women like her.
“If you look at the political climate now, there are big cases getting noticed so people feel like things are changing,” Ms. Moses said. “But in the grand scheme of things, it doesn’t feel like things are getting better.”
Some, like Jerrilyn Foster-Julian, 78, who treasures a photo she has of herself and Mr. Cuomo on a motorcycle ride with her club, Sirens, defended the governor. “He’s like me, he’s a hugger,” said Ms. Foster-Julian, who lives in Huntington, Long Island.
In his defense, Mr. Cuomo has described himself as naturally touchy, and attributed his behavior to the cultural norms of Italian Americans. Shortly after he announced his resignation, Mr. Cuomo’s attorney, Rita Glavin, gave a presentation that included a slide show of Mr. Cuomo hugging and kissing men and women, in an effort to further this point.
“In the society we’re in now, it’s so easy, when you’re on the other side of receiving something, to misinterpret it,” Ms. Foster-Julian said.
For Madalyn Fliesler, 69, a retired college professor from Buffalo, the governor’s excuses fell short. “My husband has had to adjust his behavior in the workplace. Apparently, Cuomo didn’t,” Ms. Fliesler said. “It would have been so easy to adjust behavior with the times — and he didn’t.”
She continued: “We’ve all changed. That’s part of being a society.”
Charlotte Brown, 20, a college student from Westchester, agreed. “Things are changing all the time, and if we can grow with it so can the older men in office,” she said.
“These standards are what people always should have been held to — his hand being low on a woman’s back should never have been OK,” she added.
Some women, like Cynthia Griffith, who lives in Crown Heights in Brooklyn, said they did not believe that the allegations against him rose to the level of harassment. “He’s aggressive, he sometimes comes off a little mean,” she said. “That’s who he is.”
Ms. Griffith is adamantly opposed to Mr. Cuomo’s decision to step down, particularly after his performance during the pandemic.
She continued: “I had Covid and every morning I woke up and listened to that man.”
Lauren D’Avolio, Emma Goldberg and Nate Schweber contributed reporting.
Lauren D’Avolio, Emma Goldberg and Nate Schweber contributed reporting.
