Number of new coronavirus cases jumps dramatically as China expands its diagnosis criteria
The end of the extended Lunar New Year holiday means China is theoretically returning to work. But with tens of millions still under lockdown and many more confined to work-from-home arrangements amid the coronavirus outbreak, life is a long way from returning to normal.
The number of new infections in Hubei province rose by 14,840 on Thursday as health officials broadened the criteria it uses to confirm cases. The spike comes as China's ruling Communist Party tries to manage an outpouring of public anger over its handling of the emergency and is proposing measures to boost the sagging economy.
Here are the latest developments:
● The death toll from the coronavirus rose to roughly 1,360, nearly all of the fatalities in China, andtotal confirmed cases worldwide surpassed 60,000.
● World Health Organization expert Michael Ryan said in a news briefing that — in a good sign — the novel coronavirus's behavior doesn't seem to be as aggressive or accelerating outside of Hubei province.
● In a meeting with the leadership of the Communist Party, Chinese President Xi Jinping said efforts would be made to minimize the impact of the outbreak on the economy.
● The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed a second case of coronavirus at a San Diego quarantine facility for Americans evacuated from China, bringing the total number of cases in the United States to 14.
● After several countries barred the MS Westerdam cruise ship, its 1,455 guests and the crew are headed toward Cambodia to disembark there.
9:45 PM: North Korea expands quarantine period to 30 days
North Korea announced Wednesday that it would expand its quarantine period from 15 days to 30 days in an effort to prevent new coronavirus infections, according to the state-run Korean Central News Agency.
"Foreign nationals in all institutions and sectors of the country and residing and staying in our country must abide by them," the report said.
Unlike most other East Asian nations, North Korea has not publicly confirmed any cases of the virus.
By: Marisa Iati
8:45 PM: Hubei province reports 14,840 new confirmed cases and 242 deaths
China's Hubei province, the epicenter of the outbreak, reported an uptick of 14,840 confirmed coronavirus cases Thursday as health officials expanded the type of cases that it includes in its count. The province also reported 242 new deaths.
China's state-run Xinhua News Agency announced Thursday that national health authorities issued revised guidelines to consider "clinically diagnosed" coronavirus cases in the confirmed total. Chinese officials previously only counted cases confirmed by nucleic acid tests, which critics said were faulty and greatly underestimated the true magnitude of the epidemic.
For weeks, Chinese doctors and patients have complained about a lack of nucleic acid testing kits and their accuracy. The dramatic jump in cases in Hubei essentially confirms longtime suspicions that China was for weeks vastly undercounting cases of the virus.
Hubei's total number of confirmed cases now stands at more than 48,000, with more than 1,300 deaths.
By: Marisa Iati and Gerry Shih
8:35 PM: United extends its suspension of flights to China by a month
United Airlines will continue to suspend flights between the United States and China because of the coronavirus outbreak until April 24, about a month longer than planned, the airline said Wednesday.
"We will continue to monitor the situation in China and evaluate our schedule as we remain in close contact with the CDC and other public health experts around the globe," United said in a statement.
Customers who bought tickets to Beijing, Chengdu, Shanghai or Hong Kong will get the option to rebook, including a full refund if they do not reschedule their travel.
The move by United follows one by competitor American Airlines, which said Tuesday that its suspension of flights to China and Hong Kong would last through the end of April, instead of the end of March. American cited decreased demand for those flights as a result of the coronavirus outbreak.
United typically operates about 12 flights per day from the United States to mainland China and Hong Kong. The airline said its crews clean bathrooms, tray tables, armrests and other surfaces between all international flights.
By: Marisa Iati
7:15 PM: CDC confirms another coronavirus case at San Diego quarantine site
A second person under quarantine at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego has a confirmed case of the coronavirus, raising the total number of cases in the United States to 14, according to the CDC.
The patient returned to the United States from China on a State Department-chartered flight on Friday and entered the required 14-day quarantine for people who have been in Hubei province during the past two weeks. The CDC did not release the patient's gender or age.
The new case comes after the CDC said Tuesday that another person at the quarantine site was mistakenly discharged from a San Diego hospital and later discovered to have the coronavirus. The two patients arrived in California on different planes and were staying in separate facilities, according to the CDC, which said there were no links between the cases.
"At this time there is no indication of person-to-person spread of this virus at the quarantine facility, but CDC will carry out a thorough contact investigation as part of its current response strategy to detect and contain any cases of infection with this virus," Chris Braden, the CDC's on-site lead at Miramar, said in a statement.
Nearly 200 people were released from quarantine at U.S. military bases on Tuesday, but 600 remain under surveillance.
By: Marisa Iati
6:30 PM: Most coronavirus cases are mild, complicating the response
The coronavirus has killed more than 1,100 people, brought a huge swath of central China to a standstill and rattled millions around the globe with hints of a pandemic seen in Hollywood fantasies.
But the virus's destructive potential has overshadowed one encouraging aspect of this outbreak: So far, about 82 percent of the cases — including all 13 in the United States — have been mild, with symptoms that require little or no medical intervention. And that proportion may be an undercount.
Health authorities managing the outbreak are trying to understand what that portends. Are the nearly 45,000 sick people tallied so far just a portion of a vast reservoir of uncounted victims, some of whom may be spreading the disease? And do the mild illnesses reveal characteristics of the virus itself — something that could be useful in crafting a more effective response?
"The fact that there are so many mild cases is a real hallmark of this disease and makes it so different from SARS," said Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health's Center for Health Security. "It's also really challenging. Most of our surveillance is oriented around finding people who require medical intervention."
For those who study viruses, the large number of mild cases is reason for optimism. "This looks to be a bad, heightened cold — I think that's a rational way of thinking about it," said Matthew Frieman, a virologist at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. "Not to diminish its importance — it's in the middle between SARS and the common cold."
Still, for the elderly and those with underlying heart disease, diabetes or other conditions, the disease can be quite severe. They are the ones dominating the ranks of the dead, often after pneumonia or other respiratory problems that lead to organ failure.
Read more here.
By: Lenny Bernstein and Carolyn Y. Johnson
6:00 PM: Who should be afraid of catching the coronavirus?
According to public health experts, anybody who has come in close contact with a person infected with the coronavirus is at risk of contracting it and should be on the lookout for symptoms. But how close is too close for comfort?
That depends on the makeup of the newly named covid-19 — many details of which remain unknown.
"How a virus is spread, and the severity of the illness it causes, determines how public health departments decide how many people are at risk of contagion and how many resources go into notifying them," Kaiser Health News reported.
In the case of the current coronavirus epidemic, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines close contact as spending a prolonged period within six feet of someone who has it.
"Close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a 2019-nCoV case or having direct contact with infectious secretions of a 2019-nCoV case (e.g., being coughed on)," according to the CDC's guidelines.
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has somewhat different criteria. It says close contact means living with someone who is infected, having face-to-face interactions or being in a closed space with them, providing direct care to an ill person either as health-care or laboratory work, or sitting within two seats of a confirmed case during travel.
Scientists do know that the virus that causes covid-19 has much in common with SARS, or Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, which killed about 774 people around the world in 2002 and 2003.
"There are concerns that this coronavirus, like SARS, could also linger on surfaces," said David Hamer, a professor at the Boston University School of Public Health and School of Medicine.
Hamer said disinfectants are effective against the coronavirus. China has set in motion massive disinfecting campaigns in public spaces.
In the United States, risk of contracting the virus remains very low.
"Even casual contact with an infected person, such as crossing paths on the street or briefly being in the same room, is thought not to pose much of a risk, though CDC officials stress there is still a lot to learn about the new virus," Kaiser Health News reported.
By: Miriam Berger
5:30 PM: Uighurs worry that the outbreak could spread in their camps in China
Representatives of China's Uighur minority are expressing alarm that covid-19 could expand rapidly through the internment camps where Beijing forced them to relocate, allegedly to combat terrorism, the AFP reported.
The virus so far has not spread extensively in Xinjiang province, home to the Uighurs, a Muslim ethnic group whose members speak a Turkic language. Just 59 coronavirus cases have been confirmed in the province, and three people have died.
Still, people of Uighur origin say that keeping thousands of Uighurs in close proximity and possibly denying them access to enough soap and water is likely to fuel an outbreak. NGOs and experts say little information is available about conditions inside the camps, which China maintains are "vocational education and training centers" that promote sinicization.
"People are starting to panic," Dilnur Reyhan, a French sociologist of Uighur origin, told the AFP. "Our families are there, dealing with the camps and the virus, and we do not know if they have enough to eat or if they have masks."
An online petition signed by more than 3,200 people demands that China release the Uighurs before a potential outbreak.
"We must not wait until news of hundreds of coronavirus related deaths in the camps before we react," the petition says. "As China continues to struggle to contain the virus in Wuhan, we can easily assume the virus will rapidly spread throughout the camps and affect millions if we don't raise the alarm now."
By: Marisa Iati
3:15 PM: Ninth coronavirus case confirmed in the United Kingdom
The United Kingdom confirmed its ninth coronavirus case Wednesday and said the patient contracted the virus while in China.
"This virus was passed on in China and the patient has now been transferred to a specialist NHS (National Health Service) center at Guy's and St Thomas' in London," Chris Whitty, England's chief medical officer, said in a statement, Reuters reported.
Earlier Wednesday, the World Health Organization told reporters in Geneva that of the 48 new coronavirus cases confirmed outside of China since the previous day, 40 were on the Diamond Princess cruise ship quarantined off the coast of Japan.
The number of new cases in China has been declining for a week, said WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. He cautioned Wednesday, however, that "that must be interpreted with extreme caution" as "this outbreak could go in any direction."
By: Miriam Berger
2:55 PM: World Health Organization concludes forum on treating and preventing outbreaks like coronavirus
The Geneva-based World Health Organization concluded a two-day conference Wednesday that brought together over 300 scientists and researchers to set priorities for research related to covid-19 and future outbreaks.
The forum focused on creating "a strategy for developing drugs and vaccines before epidemics, and accelerating research and development while they are occurring," according to a WHO statement.
Experts from China who could not attend in person joined in via videoconference.
"We need to come together to fight a common enemy that does not respect borders, ensure that we have the resources necessary to bring this outbreak to an end and bring our best science to the forefront to find shared answers to shared problems," said WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. "Research is an integral part of the outbreak response. I appreciate the positive response of the research community to join us at short notice and come up with concrete plans and commitment to work together."
Also Wednesday, a WHO team convened to discuss whether to continue to label the Ebola outbreak in eastern Congo, also known as DRC, as a public health emergency of international concern. Tedros determined it did.
"As long as there is a single case of Ebola in an area as insecure and unstable as eastern DRC, the potential remains for a much larger epidemic," said Tedros. "WHO's risk assessment is that the risk of [Ebola] spread is high nationally and regionally and low globally."
Tedros also cautioned that while covid-19 has dominated headlines, other deadly diseases continue to spread.
"Strengthening a health system may not be as sexy as responding to an outbreak, but it's equally important," he said.
By: Miriam Berger
2:30 PM: CDC has found no coronavirus cases since airport screening began a month ago
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has screened over 30,000 travelers from China since mid-January, and no confirmed coronavirus cases have been identified, a top official said Wednesday.
U.S. airport screening began Jan. 17 and expanded more than two weeks ago to all travelers from China to 11 U.S. airports.
"We have not detected any cases from returning travelers from China," said Nancy Messonnier, director of CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. The number of confirmed cases in the United States remains at 13, most of them travelers returning from Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak.
In a briefing with reporters, Messonnier also said test kits that CDC sent to state and local public health labs last week were producing "inconclusive results" during practice runs. "Some states were getting inconclusive results — not as false positives or false negatives — and not on actual clinical specimens," she said.
Scott Becker, executive director of the Association of Public Health Laboratories, said about 25 states had flagged the problem and notified CDC immediately. CDC determined that one component of the kit was not performing "as it should," Messonnier said. The agency is remaking that component and will send the new ones back to the labs. In the meantime, testing for covid-19 will continue at CDC headquarters in Atlanta.
As soon as CDC realized there was a problem with a component in the test kit, it did not send any of the kits to international labs, officials said.
Once the labs perform their quality control and verification procedures, states will be able to start testing patients, Becker said, a delay that may be a few days to a week.
By: Lena H. Sun
1:30 PM: Though coronavirus is centered in China, it's fueling racism toward Asians around the world
As the coronavirus epidemic continues and the number of people infected beyond China expands, communities around the world are reporting growing racism, xenophobia and discriminatory incidents targeting people of Asian heritage.
In Perth, Australia, a Malaysian woman of Chinese descent who had traveled to Malaysia for the Lunar New Year returned to find that her landlord had kicked her out, over unsubstantiated concerns that she had the virus, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported.
The woman, whom the broadcaster identified only as Helen to protect her privacy, shared text messages the landlord sent tying the eviction to the virus.
"The world health organisation has declared a global emergency and I now have made a decision to change locks on the house and put your belongings outside as I am concerned for my welfare and family and friends it was a hard decision to make between family and friends but as you have traveled we are very concerned and you are no longer welcome to come back to the house," it said.
Helen told ABC she was angry and confused.
"I haven't been to China [so] why do they think I have the virus?" she told Australian broadcaster.
Though the vast majority of coronavirus cases exist inside China, it has led to increased discrimination outside of China.
In the Netherlands, 50,000 people have signed an online petition, titled "We are not viruses," to condemn discrimination in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak.
The impetus for the petition was a song played by a Dutch radio station, "Prevention is better than Chinese," Dutch News reported. The station has since apologized for airing the song, which included the line: "Don't eat Chinese, then you have nothing to fear, because prevention is better than the Chinese."
Fifty-seven Chinese Dutch organizations issued a statement denouncing the song and the climate that gave rise to it.
"We have lived in peace and harmony with everyone in the Netherlands for more than 100 years and we have tolerated many jokes about the Chinese," the statement said, according to Dutch News. "But this song has crossed the line."
In Toronto, politicians have been touring the city's Chinatown to combat misinformation linking Chinese food or people to the virus — which spreads through droplets and can only be contracted through close contact with an infected person.
"There's still a lot of discrimination out there," Christine Elliott, Canada's health minister, told the National Post. "We want to make sure that people know it's safe to go out. It's safe to come to your favorite restaurants … it's safe to go shopping."
Chinatowns across North America have reported declines in customers in recent weeks
"What we must not do is allow ourselves in any way to stigmatize or to stop patronizing the businesses of or otherwise treat differently any group of people," Toronto Mayor John Tory said this week. "I think, in particular, of our Chinese Canadian population … which is so positive a contributor to the well-being of Toronto and to Canada."
By: Miriam Berger
12:25 PM: In Russia, 2 women claim to have fled quarantine due to poor hospital conditions
Two Russian women who recently returned from China's Hainan province claim to have escaped from quarantine in two separate Russian hospitals in recent days.
In an Instagram post Friday, a woman identified by the Moscow Times as Guzul Neder described seeking medical attention for her son's cough after returning to Russia from Hainan. She wrote that she called Russian emergency services, which told her to visit a hospital, which then held her without providing her with coronavirus test results. When she started to feel ill after five days in quarantine, she wrote, her husband brought her a pregnancy test, and she tested positive. When doctors still refused to release her, she and her son fled through a window, she wrote.
"My son was hysterical," she wrote on Instagram, according to an Associated Press translation. "There was no exit for us other than to leave the hospital without authorization, through the window."
Neder told the Moscow Times that inside the hospital, "conditions were awful."
"Doctors were very unprofessional and not wearing any protective gear," she said.
Another woman, Alla Ilyina, told the Moscow Times that she was hospitalized after returning from China despite testing negative for coronavirus three times. She claimed she "short-circuited the magnetic lock" in her room to escape.
"I studied physics, which helped," she told the newspaper.
Irina Sidorova, another woman who recently visited China, told the AP that isolation rooms were locked.
Only two cases of coronavirus have been confirmed in Russia. But hundreds of people have been held in isolation there as authorities test for the virus. Russia's Interfax news agency reported Monday that a Chinese diplomat was among those held in precautionary quarantine.
By: Siobhán O'Grady
11:40 AM: A U.S. evacuee is posting Instagrams of his life under quarantine in California
Jeffrey Ho, 33, is on a strange "vacation," as he's dubbed it for his followers on Instagram: quarantine at Travis Air Force Base in California.
Ho is one of hundreds of evacuees the United States has flown out of Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak, and placed in mandatory quarantine in the United States for 14 days. His wife and infant child, however, remained in China.
They were worried about her transporting their young daughter on such an arduous trip, he told Storyful.
Quarantine is by nature an isolating experience, but Ho has been sharing tidbits of the experience on Instagram. He's posted about his exercise routine, the quality of the food served and his search for more soap — a particular concern because people at risk of exposure to the virus have been recommended to wash their hands constantly.
Despite some complaints, Ho has also expressed a sense of gratitude for his circumstances.
"Overall pretty boring but at least I'm in America and if I do get sick there is at least space in the hospital to treat me, not like Wuhan where their hospital[s] are all maxed out and have to turn away patients that need help," he wrote on Instagram on Feb. 6.
On Monday, Ho shared a video of his room, offering a little tour of his humble abode.
"So my friends have asked me what my quarantine looks like," he said. "Well, a normal room. Thank god I brought a computer because there's Wi-Fi. And then there's this normal TV, microwave, refrigerator, coffee maker, normal restroom. And of course we are free to step outside."
By: Miriam Berger
11:15 AM: World's leading wireless industry event canceled after key companies pull out amid coronavirus fears
Mobile World Congress, the wireless industry's top yearly event, was losing participants left and right because of fears about the coronavirus spreading. On Wednesday, its organizers canceled the event, which was to be held in Barcelona, altogether, Bloomberg N ews reported.
This year's MWC, which brings together leading mobile technologies and innovators, was scheduled for four days starting Feb. 24. Organizers originally expected around 100,000 participants, but in recent days, big names such as Nokia Oyj, Ericsson AB, BT Group and Sony Corp. pulled out, Bloomberg reported. Companies were reportedly worried about exposing employees to coronavirus during travel to and from the event.
MWC's cancellation is the first time in the event's 33-year history. MWC also joins a growing list of global business gatherings canceled or curbed because of the coronavirus outbreak.
By: Miriam Berger
10:45 AM: Israel asks Japan to release Israelis from cruise-ship quarantine
TEL AVIV — Israel's Foreign Ministry asked Japan on Wednesday to release Israeli citizens aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship, which has been on lockdown off the coast of Japan, and said it will find another location for the passengers to complete their quarantine period.
Some 15 Israelis are confined to the ship and have been widely interviewed by Israeli media, describing their conditions confined to their cabins. They have said they are allowed out only once a day for fresh air and have their meals delivered to their rooms.
The Foreign Ministry confirmed Tuesday that one Israeli tourist aboard the Diamond Princess was found to have a high temperature and was being checked to see if she had contracted the coronavirus.
In a statement Wednesday, Foreign Minister Israel Katz said Israeli authorities have been in daily contact with their Japanese counterparts regarding the situation. Katz also said the Israeli Embassy in Japan has been working to ensure that the needs of Israelis onboard are met, such as requests to receive kosher food in keeping with Jewish dietary laws.
In contrast to Israel's appeal, the United States has rejected calls from U.S. citizens onboard to be evacuated and quarantined elsewhere, saying that the safest place for them is on the ship.
More than 170 of the 492 people tested for the virus onboard the cruise liner have tested positive for the virus. Roughly 3,700 passengers and crew members of various nationalities are on the ship.
On Sunday, Israel's Health Ministry expanded the list of travel destinations it recommended avoiding to include Hong Kong, Japan, Macao, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam. A warning about travel to China was issued earlier in the month, and Israelis returning from China are required to quarantine themselves for 14 days.
By: Ruth Eglash, with Miriam Berger in Washington
10:15 AM: International flights to China have fallen by 67 percent
International flight routes to China have fallen by 67 percent since Jan. 30, when the World Health Organization declared a global health emergency as a result of the coronavirus outbreak, according to an analysis by Nikkei, a leading financial newspaper based in Japan.
Nikkei found that flights with links to the United States have declined by 76 percent and connections through Japan have fallen by 55 percent. The United States imposed stringent travel restrictions on Jan. 31 barring non-U.S. citizens who had recently traveled in China.
The disease new coronavirus, named Wednesday by the World Health Organization as covid-19, could be on track to have an even bigger impact on the aviation industry than the SARS epidemic in 2003, Nikkei estimated. Cuts in flights have also affected the hospitality industry. Hilton Hotels and Resorts has shut 150 hotels in China due to fallout from the virus, chief executive Christopher Nassetta said during the latest earnings call, Nikkei reported.
By: Miriam Berger
9:55 AM: Suspected British 'superspreader' is released from hospital
LONDON — The British business executive suspected of playing an outsize role in transmitting the coronavirus was released from a hospital and is no longer contagious, health authorities said Wednesday.
Steve Walsh, a project management lead for Servomex, a gas analytics company, is believed to have passed the virus to at least 11 people in three countries. He was attending a work conference from Jan. 18 to 22 in Singapore, which is where he is thought to have caught the virus. Unaware that he was infected, he visited a ski resort in the French Alps before returning to England on Jan. 28.
It was at the ski resort where he is thought to have unknowingly passed along the virus. Five of those infected at the resort are still in France, one is in Mallorca, and five others — including two British doctors — are back in Britain.
Keith Willett, strategic incident director for the National Health Service (NHS), said in a statement: "I'm pleased to say that — following two negative tests for coronavirus, twenty-four hours apart — Mr Walsh has been discharged from Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, having made a full recovery following his treatment."
"Mr Walsh's symptoms were mild and he is no longer contagious, and poses no risk to the public," he said. Walsh is "keen to return to his normal life and spend time with his family out of the media spotlight," Willett added.
"I'm happy to be home and feeling well," Walsh said in a statement. "I want to give a big thank you to the NHS who have been great throughout and my thoughts are with everyone around the world who continues to be affected by the virus."
By: Karla Adam
9:30 AM: Chinese Grand Prix postponed due to coronavirus outbreak
Formula One announced Wednesday that April's 2020 Chinese Grand Prix would be postponed due to the deadly coronavirus outbreak. Organizers confirmed they are seeking "alternative dates" for the Shanghai event to take place in the future.
"F1 and the FIA [International Automobile Federation] have accepted a request from the promoter to postpone the event," Formula One announced in a tweet, adding that officials would be monitoring the situation closely.
In a statement, Formula One offered its well wishes to the people of China amid the crisis and said: "The Chinese Grand Prix has always been a very important part of the F1 calendar and the fans are always incredible. We all look forward to racing in China as soon as possible."
Other sporting events have also been canceled due to the outbreak, including two women's golf tournaments. The Ladies Professional Golf Association and its partners announced earlier this month that the 2020 Honda LPGA Thailand and the 2020 HSBC Women's World Championship in Singapore have been canceled, citing "continued health concerns and recent advisories" surrounding the disease.
This year's World Athletics Indoor Championships, expected to take place from March 13 to 15, were also postponed, with the organization saying it would not seek to reschedule the event until 2021.
"The advice from our medical team, who are in contact with the World Health Organization, is that the spread of the Coronavirus both within China and outside the country is still at a concerning level and no one should be going ahead with any major gathering that can be postponed," World Athletics said in a statement last month.
By: Jennifer Hassan
8:45 AM: Indonesia's virus-free status may be threatened by case confirmed in recent Chinese visitor
A Chinese man who recently visited the Indonesian resort island of Bali has tested positive for the coronavirus, according to Chinese authorities, raising the possibility that there might be undetected cases of the virus in the huge archipelago.
Alone among the major countries of Southeast Asia, Indonesia has not reported a single case of the coronavirus, even though it receives millions of Chinese tourists each year and all of its neighbors have cases.
The Jakarta Post reported that authorities in China's Anhui Province confirmed that a man who had visited Bali in late January has the virus. He flew directly from Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, to Bali on Jan. 22 and stayed on the island a week before flying on to Shanghai.
In a statement on social media site Weibo, authorities in Anhui warned people on both those flights that they may have been exposed.
The director general of the Indonesian Health Ministry's disease control department, Anung Sugihantono, told the Jakarta Post that it was still trying to confirm the report, even as he dismissed it as a "rumor."
Indonesia's lack of cases has surprised observers. According to a Harvard University study, mathematically at least, it should have cases due to the large number of travelers regularly visiting from Wuhan, suggesting the possibility that cases are going undetected. That study has also been dismissed by the Indonesian government.
Dozens of Indonesians, however, have been quarantined, including 68 who had just returned from China as well as 30 Chinese workers.
By: Paul Schemm
8:15 AM: China's Xi urges efforts to keep economy on track
BEIJING — Chinese leader Xi Jinping urged the top cadres in the ruling Communist Party not to allow any letup in the "war" against the coronavirus, stressing the need to still meet this year's economic goals.
"The results are hard-won progress made by all sides," Xi told the six other members of the Politburo's Standing Committee at a meeting Wednesday, referring to the "positive changes" of recent days.
Chinese officials have been stressing that the number of infections outside the epicenter of Hubei province has continued to steadily decline, even as the overall infection rate and death toll continues to climb.
Xi said that epidemic prevention and control efforts have entered "a critical stage that requires stringent efforts," according to the official Xinhua News Agency.
Chinese officials from Xi down have voiced clear concern about the impact that the epidemic will have on the country's economy, which had already entered a period of prolonged structural decline. The authorities had been making concerted efforts — including massaging the numbers, according to many economists — to keep the annual growth rate on target at 6 percent.
The party "should strive to minimize the impact from the novel coronavirus pneumonia epidemic, to maintain the steadiness of the economy and the harmony and stability of society, and make efforts to accomplish all goals and tasks set by the Party Central," Xinhua said in its summary of the meeting.
By: Anna Fifield
7:50 AM: Chinese publisher apologizes for labeling civet cats as 'edible' in children's book
BEIJING — Numerous Chinese children's books were pulled nationwide, following outrage over their labeling of civet cats — an animal widely associated with the SARS outbreak — as "edible" game meat, Chinese media reported on Wednesday.
"Civet cats are full of treasures in and out, and their meat is edible and long known as a rare 'delicacy from the mountains,' [and] their fur can be made into gloves, and their tail and guard hair can be made into brushes," says a book entitled "Mini Encyclopedia of Animals," which was published by Wuhan University Press.
On the Chinese microblogging website Weibo, users posted images of the controversial page this week, accusing the publisher of "irresponsible" and "vulgar" practices.
The online fury pressured the company into issuing a statement on social media and pulling the book off shelves.
By: Lyric Li
7:30 AM: Three more South Korean coronavirus patients discharged from hospital
SEOUL — South Korea on Wednesday discharged three more patients, bringing the total number to 7, in a promising sign for the overall recovery rate. In total, 28 people have tested positive for the virus in the country.
A quarter of South Korea's coronavirus patients have now fully recovered from the disease and been released from quarantine, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) said.
One of the three patients discharged on Wednesday was believed to have infected five other people. South Korean media outlets have referred to the patient as a "super-spreader."
Lee Wang-jun, chairman of Myongji hospital where the patient was treated, said he suffered from malicious media reports against him and had to receive psychiatric treatment. Lee told reporters on Wednesday that coronavirus patients have to "endure fear while isolated alone in a small space."
Lee said the patient recovered after anti-HIV drug Kaletra was used on him. Kaletra has also been deployed in Chinese hospitals as a possible therapy against the new coronavirus.
By: Min Joo Kim
7:15 AM: Yunnan introduces bar codes to track residents' movements in public
BEIJING — The southwestern Chinese province of Yunnan on Wednesday launched a WeChat in-app program called Kang Yiqing (Fighting the Epidemic) that requires residents to register their personal information by scanning a QR code whenever they enter a public venue.
In a notice issued Tuesday, the provincial epidemic control command center said that "public venues" would include residential areas, farmers markets, shopping malls, supermarkets, restaurants, hospitals, pharmacies, airport terminals, subway stations, bus terminals and other means of public transportation.
"For those who refuse to cooperate, public venue management has the right to ban them from entering or exiting. Those who try to force [their way] into public venues without registration, disturb public order or cause serious consequences will be held accountable according to law," the notice said.
By: Lyric Li
6:50 AM: Westerdam cruise ship is headed toward Cambodia
A cruise ship that has been barred from numerous countries in recent days amid coronavirus concerns "is now sailing for Sihanoukville, Cambodia, where the current cruise will end," the Holland America cruise line said Wednesday.
The MS Westerdam cruise ship is expected to arrive in Cambodia early Thursday local time. "Guests will be able to go ashore. All approvals have been received and we are extremely grateful to the Cambodian authorities for their support," the cruise line wrote in a statement.
There are no suspected or confirmed coronavirus cases onboard the ship, the cruise line said.
Its 1,455 travelers will disembark "over the next few days and transfer via charter flights to Phnom Penh for forward travel home." There are also 802 crew members onboard the ship, Holland America added.
The ship left Hong Kong on Feb. 1, but the coronavirus outbreak derailed multiple subsequent attempts to anchor at ports in the region.
After Guam, Taiwan, the Philippines and Japan had all turned the cruise ship away, Thailand also barred travelers onboard the MS Westerdam from disembarking near Bangkok this week.
By: Rick Noack
6:25 AM: Airbnb and other companies extend suspension of mainland China services
Airbnb joined a number of other global companies on Wednesday in extending the suspension of some services in mainland China as a result of the coronavirus outbreak. The short-term home rental platform said it was halting all bookings until April 30.
It had previously suspended check-ins in the Chinese capital through the end of February.
A number of airlines have similarly extended their suspensions of flights to mainland China in recent days, including British Airways. The carrier announced Monday that it has canceled all flights to mainland China until the end of March.
By: Rick Noack
6:00 AM: British research center compares covid-19 fatality ratio to 'major influenza pandemics' of 20th century
Researchers with Imperial College London estimate in a new report that about 1 percent of all people with the covid-19 disease will die, even though they cautioned that their latest figures rely on limited data and are still subject to change in the coming weeks.
The estimates, co-author Neil Ferguson was quoted as saying in a release on Tuesday night, "suggest that the impact of the unfolding epidemic may be comparable to the major influenza pandemics of the twentieth century."
Between 1918 and 1919, an influenza pandemic killed up to 40 million people worldwide. Medical equipment and treatments have significantly improved since, but the novel coronavirus still poses a serious risk, the researchers suggested.
While the case fatality ratio for covid-19 is "lower than diseases such as Ebola or SARS, it is considerably higher than seasonal influenza," Imperial College professor Steven Riley said in the release.
Data on case fatality ratios have varied widely in recent weeks. Hence, for their latest figures, which were first released on Monday, the Imperial College researchers also had to estimate the number of cases that have gone unreported. In the outbreak's epicenter, Wuhan, only the most severely ill patients have so far been tested for the virus — which likely skewed the reported case fatality ratio there, the researchers said.
Because the confirmed case fatality ratio in Wuhan is far higher than among patients elsewhere, the Imperial College research team estimates that "only about 1 in 19 people infected with covid-19 in Wuhan are being tested for infection and therefore being reported as confirmed cases."
By: Rick Noack
5:30 AM: Supply chain disruptions due to China outbreak shuttering Cambodia textile factories
Supply chain disruptions are now affecting Cambodia's garment and textile factories, among the country's biggest employers, as raw materials from China dry up due to the outbreak of the coronavirus.
Local news reports, quoting the Garment Manufacturers' Association, said some factories may be forced to close, as they rely on Chinese suppliers for more than 60 percent of raw materials. Chinese suppliers, the association said in the Khmer Times newspaper, "will not be able to provide raw materials to factories in Cambodia by the end of February or March."
The Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training has also warned of an impact on the garment factories, which it says may be forced to lay off workers. The labor minister, according to the Phnom Penh Post, said Chinese suppliers are simply not taking orders because many businesses remain closed in China to prevent the virus from spreading.
Cambodia is already bracing for heavy economic impact from an impending European Union decision to suspend its special trade preferences over human rights concerns. That decision, expected Wednesday, could result in Cambodia's removal from the E.U.'s "Everything But Arms" trade program, which allows duty-free export of goods from developing countries into the European Union. That decision will be most heavily felt in the garment sector, as the European Union is Cambodia's biggest export market.
By: Shibani Mahtani
5:24 AM: 'Practical issues' prompted State Department to authorize departure of some staff in Hong Kong
HONG KONG — A State Department official said Wednesday that consular staff have been permitted to leave Hong Kong due to uncertainties stemming from the coronavirus outbreak, and because of "practical issues" such as school closures.
On Tuesday, the State Department authorized departure for non-emergency personnel working in the consulate, which is a separate mission from the U.S. Embassy in China. A similar authorization is in place for the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, and extends to U.S. consulates in Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shanghai and Shenyang.
The choice to leave is voluntary, however, and the State Department official said that most staff will stay in Hong Kong. Consular services will operate as usual.
"We have seen things like school closures, and the public facilities, many of them being closed for a couple of weeks in some cases," the official said. "That is something that factors into the decision."
The department, he added, "wanted to make sure that [staff] have a range of options."
Schools in Hong Kong have been closed since late January and will remain shut until at least March 2, according to government officials. Most offices have implemented work-from-home arrangements, making the usually bustling financial center appear decidedly sleepy in recent weeks.
Hong Kong has 47 confirmed coronavirus cases, and experts worry that the virus is spreading more widely in the community.
By: Shibani Mahtani
5:11 AM: North Korean premier, wearing a mask, visits coronavirus prevention headquarters
SEOUL — North Korean Premier Kim Jae Ryong, wearing a surgical mask, has inspected the country's "emergency anti-epidemic headquarters" to oversee efforts to cope with the coronavirus outbreak, apparently confirming reports that the pneumonia-like illness has arrived in the country.
The Rodong Sinmun, the mouthpiece of the ruling Workers' Party, reported Wednesday that Kim had urged "full preparations for rapidly coping with" the coronavirus, calling it "an important work concerning the state's security and people's lives."
The paper carried a picture of a mask-clad Kim in a meeting with officials.
Kim visited emergency anti-epidemic headquarters in the cities of Pyongyang and Nampho and in other provinces. He stressed the need for "thoroughly conducting inspection and quarantine in the border passing spots and strictly keeping anti-epidemic discipline," according to the paper.
North Korea has not reported a case of coronavirus infection, although nearly 200 cases have been confirmed in the northeastern Chinese provinces of Liaoning and Jilin that border the isolated nation.
The Daily NK, a defector-led news service in South Korea with contacts inside the North, last week reported that five people in North Pyongan province, near the border with China, died after suffering from high fever and flulike symptoms — conditions consistent with the coronavirus.
Separately, South Korea's JoongAng Ilbo newspaper reported that a Pyongyang resident who recently returned from China has been diagnosed with the coronavirus, citing an unnamed source in North Korea.
North Korea banned foreign tourists and cut cross-border air and train routes last month in response to the epidemic. The official Korean Central News Agency said Wednesday that the country's Red Cross is working with international organizations to contain the coronavirus.
The Red Cross in North Korea has mobilized 500 volunteers in four provinces near the Chinese border, Xavier Castellanos, Asia Pacific regional director at the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, was quoted as saying by the Voice of America on Wednesday.
By: Min Joo Kim
4:22 AM: Tibet clear of coronavirus
Tibet has been ruled clear of coronavirus after the sole confirmed patient was discharged from a hospital in Lhasa on Wednesday afternoon.
The patient, known only by his family name Zhang, has tested negative in two separate assessments and was found to have fully recovered after two weeks of treatment at Tibet Third People's Hospital, authorities there said.
Zhang took a slow train from Wuhan, just as the outbreak was intensifying in the city, and arrived in Lhasa on Jan. 24. He sought medical treatment a day later and was put under quarantine. On Jan. 29, he became the first confirmed case in Tibet, triggering the highest level of health emergency response from the regional government.
Zhang is expected to leave Lhasa by train Wednesday.
Tibet is now the only region or province in China that is free of the coronavirus.
By: Lyric Li
3:40 AM: Beijing restricts sales of fever and cough medicine to stop self-medicating
BEIJING — The Chinese capital has become the latest city to restrict the sales of over-the-counter fever and cough medicines, part of an effort to stop sick people — and people potentially infected with coronavirus — from treating themselves instead of seeking medical help.
Pharmacies in Beijing have been instructed to register the real names and identity numbers of customers who purchase fever and cough medicines, the capital's unit for preventing and controlling the coronavirus announced.
Beijing joins Hangzhou, in the badly affected province of Zhejiang, and Shenzhen in equally hard-hit Guangdong province, in requiring pharmacies to record and report this kind of information.
By: Liu Yang
3:35 AM: Shanghai starts disinfecting parcels and monitoring couriers
BEIJING — The city of Shanghai, which has 311 confirmed cases of coronavirus, has implemented new rules to try to prevent couriers from spreading the virus as they go around delivering packages.
All parcels arriving in Shanghai will be disinfected, and all facilities and equipment used for deliveries must be disinfected at the beginning of each shift, according to new rules announced Wednesday by Yu Hongwei, vice director of the Shanghai Postal Administration.
Delivery staff will have their temperatures checked before they start work each day and will have to wear a mask while on the job, Yu said at a news conference in Shanghai, according to the Paper. Establishments that receive customers must carry out disinfection every two hours.
As Shanghai authorities try to get the city back to work as much as possible, it has implemented a range of new rules designed to stop the virus from spreading. These including banning air-conditioning and heating on public transportation, including buses and ferries, and mandating open windows for ventilation.
Trains and railway stations must have their air ventilation systems running around the clock. And construction sites have been required to set up "health observation points" to monitor workers, and they must report the results to authorities daily.
By: Wang Yuan
3:20 AM: Singer finds humor in coronavirus woes with 'Torn' parody
BEIJING — The coronavirus has changed daily life across China and other infected areas, such as Hong Kong and Macao, with people unable to go to work and school and confronting shortages of basic goods in some places.
So Hong Kong-New Zealand performer Kathy Mak struck a chord with a coronavirus song she performed in Hong Kong, a rewrite of "Torn," originally by Natalie Imbruglia.
"So glad my parody of #torn has received so much love and made, many people laugh!" she wrote on Twitter after the video clip was widely shared in Hong Kong and among expats in China.
She sings about hibernating and using hand sanitizer so much her hands dry out. But here are this reporter's favorite lines:
"There's nothing left at the grocery store
I can't find bok choy no more
There's just white people things
Like pasta, cheese and corn."
By: Anna Fifield
3:10 AM: Outbreak epicenter of Wuhan facing shortage of oxygen tanks
BEIJING — Wuhan is facing a shortage of medical oxygen tanks — critical to fighting a respiratory ailment like the new coronavirus — as hospitals continue to cope with a large number of severe cases
Front-line doctors in Wuhan say their daily work has been "greatly incapacitated" by a shortage of medical supplies as hospitals find that medical oxygen tanks are increasingly become a "luxury."
"Many of our doctors and nurses are spending a lot of time replacing oxygen tanks, very heavy ones. And even the wheelies for the tanks are not enough. We don't know how long it takes until the next batch of oxygen tanks will arrive here," a doctor from Sichuan told Caixin magazine on the condition of anonymity. "The whole city of Wuhan is fighting for oxygen tanks."
Thousands of doctors and nurses from around the country have been dispatched to or are volunteering at the virus-stricken city since late January, and they have to haggle over daily quotas of the most basic medical supplies, such as masks and oxygen.
"We are here as reinforcement, but even the most experienced of us have found it hard to work with so few 'weapons,'" the Sichuan doctor said, adding that on most days their oxygen tanks would be depleted by noon.
"A lot of patients are going to deteriorate because of a lack of oxygen supplies. On top of our daily to-do list is not waiting for the medicine, but for the oxygen tanks," he added.
The oxygen shortage is particularly taking a toll on hospitals and quarantine facilities that have housed critical cases with breathing difficulties, who need 10 times as much oxygen intake as mild cases.
"I know that it's in short supply in the entire Wuhan, because every hospital has been using so much oxygen every day. We have a lot of heavily infected patients at Tongji Hospital, so it is more serious for us than other hospitals," said a logistics coordinator at Tongji Hospital, one of the major facilities for critical cases in Wuhan.
At a news conference Friday, government officials and doctors said that a centralized oxygen supply could no longer sustain daily operations in hospitals and that many facilities were running at maximum capacity.
"The oxygen supply in every hospital could have been designed for radical circumstances, but the problem now is that life-support machines have to run on oxygen. When we fail to get more oxygen, then we have no way to keep more machines going for the critical cases, which has greatly incapacitated our treatment of patients," said Peng Peng, director of Wuhan Pulmonary Department Hospital. "And I think this is true for all hospitals out here."
By: Anna Fifield
3:00 AM: Taiwanese denied entry into Philippines over virus fears decry 'one China' policy
MANILA — At least 80 Taiwanese passengers were denied entry to the Philippines due to an expanded travel ban amid the coronavirus outbreak — a measure driving frustration regarding China's claim over the self-ruled island.
Immigration spokesperson Dana Sandoval said most of those affected returned to their port of origin by Wednesday.
But Taiwanese passengers said this did not go smoothly, citing confusion and a lack of coordination on the ground.
The ban was initially reported to cover just China, Hong Kong and Macao. When Philippine authorities confirmed Taiwan's inclusion due to the "one China" policy, officials there were taken by surprise. Flights to and from Taipei were not canceled until 11 p.m. on Monday.
When one passenger, Robert Chen, landed just past midnight, he said there was no embassy representative and a Chinese-speaking attendant was not immediately available to explain what had happened.
He and around a dozen other Taiwanese were "really disappointed, angry, helpless, and overwhelmed."
In a video he sent The Post, an irate Filipino passenger in the same terminal could be heard saying, "Those people are waiting out there! We're tired, okay?"
Chen's companions boarded a return flight after three hours, but Chen waited almost 12 hours to be accommodated.
An estimated 500 Taiwanese were stranded across the country after the ban, which some government critics see as a politically motivated measure to curry favor with China.
Taiwan has only 18 confirmed cases of the virus, compared to tens of thousands in mainland China.
"We are not part of China. … We have our own government, we have our own passport," said Momo Lin, a businessman based in Manila with whom Chen was supposed to spend his stay. "We can totally understand why Philippines wants to follow the "one China" policy, because they have a lot of co-work, co-construction. … However, we also have really good connection with Philippines. Most Filipinos know Taiwan is not part of China."
By: Regine Cabato
2:52 AM: Japanese health worker who boarded quarantined cruise ship is now infected
YOKOHAMA, Japan — Japan's Health Ministry said a quarantine officer who worked on board the Diamond Princess cruise liner has tested positive for the new coronavirus and been sent to a hospital, marking the first case in the country recorded among health service staff.
The officer, from the ministry's infectious disease quarantine office, worked on the ship on Feb. 3 and 4, as part of a team carrying out a survey of passengers to ascertain who needed to be tested for the virus, collecting questionnaires and taking temperatures.
He then returned to work in his office from Feb. 5 to 7, before falling ill with a fever on Feb. 9, public broadcaster NHK and other media reported.
"We will examine how he was infected, confirm which routes he took, and what he did," Health Minister Katsunobu Kato told reporters. "While doing so, we will thoroughly implement measures to prevent quarantine officers from getting infected."
The officer was wearing masks and gloves, in line with World Health Organization guidelines, and disinfected his hands and fingers after dealing with each passenger, the Yomiuri newspaper reported. But he was not wearing a protective suit or goggles, and he did enter some cabins.
With Japanese media concerned he could have infected other people, the Health Ministry said his family and co-workers have been advised to stay home.
The ministry on Wednesday said a further 39 people on board the Diamond Princess have tested positive for the virus, among 53 people whose test results came back. That brings the total to 174 people infected, out of 492 who have been tested for the virus, more than 1 in 3.
Before the ship was placed in quarantine last week, there were 2,666 passengers and 1,045 crew on board, but more than 110 have already been taken off the ship for medical treatment. Ambulances and medical staff clad in white protective suits continued to evacuate people on Wednesday.
The number of infected crew members rose by 10 to 20 people. Crew members say they are not segregated as passengers are, but forced to live and work in proximity, and they're worried they will catch the virus from each other. Medical experts say there is also a risk that infected crew members could pass the virus on to passengers.
By: Simon Denyer
2:50 AM: Ten Hong Kongers stranded in Hubei have become infected with coronavirus
HONG KONG — The Hong Kong government on Wednesday said 10 Hong Kong people in Hubei province, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak, have become infected.
Those 10 people are from three families, a spokesman for the Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Bureau said. Seven of those people are in Wuhan, and three are in Enshi, a smaller city in the central area of the province.
When Hubei province went under lockdown in late January, a move taken to contain the outbreak, more than 1,300 people Hong Kong people were trapped across 30 cities in the province. Hong Kong is a semiautonomous territory with its own immigration system and its own passports, but falls under China's sovereignty.
Dozens of countries and territories — including self-governing Taiwan — have evacuated their people from the virus-hit province. The Hong Kong government has been under pressure to do the same, but has not announced any concrete steps or evacuation plans.
The spokesman for Hong Kong's mainland affairs office said six of the affected people have been admitted to local hospitals in coordination with "relevant authorities," while the other four have "made their own way" to seek medical treatment from hospitals. All are "generally in stable condition," the spokesman added. The statement offered no details on potential evacuations.
Those trapped in Wuhan say they are worried about overcrowded hospitals and shortage of medical supplies. Hospitals are turning people away, as they struggle to treat the mounting number of cases.
By: Shibani Mahtani
2:44 AM: Chinese expert predicts coronavirus outbreak will be over by April
BEIJING — Renowned epidemiologist Zhong Nanshan, a member of the National Health Commission's expert panel advising on the coronavirus, has predicted that the outbreak will peak in China this month and could be over by April.
"I hope this outbreak or this event may be over in something like April," Zhong told Reuters in an interview at a hospital run by Guangzhou Medical University, where 11 coronavirus patients were being treated.
He voiced optimism that the outbreak would soon begin to lose its momentum, and using mathematical modeling, recent events and government action, he forecast a peak in the middle or end of February, followed by a plateau and then a decrease. Zhong had previously predicted the outbreak would hit its peak between Feb. 12 and 17.
"We don't know why it's so contagious, so that's a big problem," Zhong told Reuters.
The 83-year-old, who was also central to China's response to the SARS outbreak of 2002-2003, wiped away tears when asked about Li Wenliang, the Wuhan ophthalmologist who was censured for trying to raise the alarm about the virus, then died of it earlier this month.
"The majority of the people think he's the hero of China," Zhong said. "I'm so proud of him. He told people the truth, at the end of December, and then he passed away."
When asked about Zhong's analysis, however, the chief medical officer of Australia, Brendan Murphy, told the Australia Broadcasting Corp that such predictions were "premature" and it would require weeks more data before such a conclusion could be drawn.
By: Anna Fifield
2:40 AM: Singapore bank evacuates staff after confirmed virus case
Singapore's biggest bank was forced to evacuate 300 staff from its head office in the city-state on Wednesday, Reuters reported, citing an internal memo, after discovering a confirmed case of coronavirus.
The memo sent to staff by DBS Singapore country head Shee Tse Koon said the bank was taking a "precautionary measure" and evacuating all staff who worked on the 43rd floor of Marina Bay Financial Center Tower 3, the agency reported. DBS is the anchor tenant of that office tower. All of the affected staff will now work from home.
As the number of coronavirus cases has risen to 47 in Singapore — including a worker at one of the city's two casinos — its financial center, where some of the world's largest corporations have offices, have been bracing for impact.
Since the outbreak of the virus, Singapore residents have continued to go to work, unlike cities like Hong Kong and in mainland China which have put in place work-from-home measures. School has also continued, since the emergency response level is not yet at its highest level in Singapore.
Many office buildings in Singapore have begun mandatory temperature checks, and have mandated staff to make health declarations, forcing them to self-quarantine if they have recently visited mainland China.
By: Shibani Mahtani
2:15 AM: Situation in Hubei remains dire despite drop in rate of new cases nationwide
BEIJING — There were 377 new infections reported in provinces outside Hubei, the epicenter of the outbreak, on Tuesday, according to official National Health Commission statistics, as Chinese authorities searched for positive signs as they try to get the country back to work and some sort of normalcy.
But inside Hubei, the situation remains dire. There were 94 deaths from coronavirus inside the province, and the number of confirmed cases climbed to 33,366.
By: Anna Fifield
