Air Force evacuates 89 Americans from Honduras after coronavirus travel advisory; states increase restrictions
Restrictions are dramatically ramping up amid the growing coronavirus pandemic, with Illinois and its 13 million residents — 10 million in the Chicago area — the latest to join California by moving closer to an effective lockdown. Meanwhile, New York told nonessential workers to stay home, Florida closed restaurants, bars and gyms amid spring-break revelry, and the U.S.-Mexico border is closing to nonessential travel.
Here are some significant developments:
The Air Force conducted two flights Friday that helped bring 89 Americans stranded in Honduras back to the United States.
Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer on Friday said President Trump had approved a major disaster declaration for the state of New York.
A member of Vice President Pence's office has tested positive for the coronavirus, according to press secretary Katie Miller. "Neither President Trump nor Vice President Pence had close contact with the individual," Miller wrote.
Italy announced another record-breaking death toll on Friday: 627, up from 427 the previous day. The country cited 9,600 people in one day for violating lockdown.
The U.S. tax filing deadline has been pushed back from April 15 to July 15. "All taxpayers and businesses will have this additional time to file and make payments without interest or penalties," Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Twitter.
More than 250,000 cases have been confirmed across the globe. The World Health Organization noted that it took more than three months to reach 100,000 cases worldwide — but only 12 days to log the next 100,000. The number of deaths and confirmed cases continues to surge in Spain and Iran.
For a second consecutive day, China reported no new local infections. But concerns are growing about a new wave of imported cases elsewhere in the region: Hong Kong reported its biggest daily jump in cases Friday, including many that involved recent travel.
Sign up for our coronavirus newsletter | Mapping the spread of the coronavirus | What you need to know about the virus | Post Reports: Your questions about coronavirus, answered
