Coronavirus Update
More than two-thirds of states have now relaxed restrictions imposed during the coronavirus pandemic. Restaurants and bars in much of Virginia will be able to seat customers for happy hour, but only outside. Much of upstate New York is about to reopen, but the preferred method of shopping involves curbside pickups.
All this has turned retail workers and servers into de facto enforcers of public health guidelines. It has also underscored just how much the coronavirus outbreak has been a wave hitting different places at different moments: As the authorities in some places have moved to loosen restrictions, other areas continue to face rising caseloads. In Nebraska, coronavirus infections have more than doubled since April 30. New cases and deaths remain stubbornly high in Los Angeles and Chicago. The Navajo Nation in New Mexico ordered a 57-hour lockdown for the weekend, with the nation's president urging ''the whole Navajo Nation to stay home'' -- and everyone else to stay away, too.
If any more alarming economic numbers were needed to document the damage the pandemic has caused, two government agencies provided them on Friday: The Commerce Department said retail sales fell by 16.4 percent last month, and the Federal Reserve said industrial production plunged 11.2 percent in April, the steepest drop on record.
Globally, nations are moving at their own speed as they plot their own ways to emerge from their lockdowns. In much of Australia, customers were allowed to return to cafes and restaurants on Friday. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said it was ''a welcome sign that we are on the road back.''
But it looks like a bumpy road. Germany, the biggest economy in Europe, said on Friday that it was essentially in an economic free fall, shrinking the most in more than a decade and leaving the country in recession.
XXX
The surf's up along the California coast, along with new rules. Los Angeles County beaches now require masks. In New York, with the temperature in the 80s on Friday afternoon and a warm weekend ahead, Mayor Bill de Blasio said the city would work to thin out crowds in parks in Manhattan and Brooklyn, even deploying police officers to limit access to the 15-acre Sheep Meadow in Central Park.
He also said the city would ''reset'' its approach to enforcing social distancing. Police officers will now concentrate on breaking up big gatherings. ''The goal is to not even get to the point of summons, just to make sure that large gatherings don't happen,'' he said. Nor will officers enforce orders directing people to wear face coverings when social distancing is not possible. ''When someone says, 'I don't have a face covering with me,' we want N.Y.P.D. officers and all these other civilian ambassadors and everyone else to be there with a solution'' -- a mask or friendly guidance on where to get one, the mayor said.
The mayor's comments came after complaints that the police were unfairly targeting black and Latino residents for enforcement. On Thursday, the mayor criticized officers seen in a video wrestling a woman to the ground. They were attempting to arrest her for not covering her face.
What about reopening the beaches in the city? You can relish the memory of a hot dog at Coney Island but don't count on ordering one soon. Reopening city beaches is ''not in the cards right now,'' Mr. de Blasio said.
Beaches in New York -- and in New Jersey, Connecticut and Delaware -- can open next Friday for the Memorial Day weekend, at reduced capacity and with restrictions. But local governments can keep beaches in their jurisdictions closed. The beaches in state parks, including Jones Beach and Robert Moses State Park on Long Island, both of which attract sun-and-fun seekers from New York City, will be open.
XXX
They can be daunting, demoralizing and distressing, but even motor vehicle agencies are coming back to life. Starting May 26, the department that issues licenses in Minnesota plans to give road tests that were canceled after Gov. Tim Walz issued a stay-at-home order. Would-be drivers will have to do more than pass the conventional written test and demonstrate their parallel parking prowess. Before they get that far, they will have to answer health-screening questions. And, like the testers assigned to ride with them, they will have to wear face masks.
The pandemic has produced an unexpected benefit on the roads in Southeast Asia, where road fatalities are a leading killer: fewer fatalities. Traffic accidents killed more than 21,000 people in Thailand last year, many of them on motorcycles. During the pandemic, the death rate on the roads has dropped by roughly half, Thailand's Road Safety Commission said. The decrease in Malaysia amounted to about two-thirds fewer deaths. Curtailed New Year's celebrations in Thailand, Cambodia and Myanmar last month also reduced traffic deaths -- less carousing meant less drunken driving, which meant fewer accidents and fatalities.
By contrast, in East Africa, long-haul truckers are apparently helping to spread the coronavirus.
Long-haul truck drivers were deemed essential workers because they deliver food, medicine and badly needed consumer products in country after country. Uganda said that all 21 of the coronavirus cases it recorded on Thursday had come from drivers from Kenya, South Sudan, Tanzania and Uganda. Kenya's health ministry also said that four Kenyan truckers and eight Tanzanian truck drivers had tested positive for the virus.
Officials across the region have ordered drivers checked at border crossings. Many drivers have complained of harassment and discrimination along the way. Some said long waits for testing have led to the loss of perishable goods.
XXX
It's over. That was the message from Slovenia, the first European nation to declare an end to its national epidemic. The government said that the spread of the virus had been brought under control and that extraordinary restrictions were no longer necessary. ''It's a success, and we did it together,'' said Jelko Kacin, a government spokesman, during a televised briefing on Friday.
But requirements for social distancing and masks in public are not being lifted.
Slovenia introduced its restrictions early, blocking border entry points in mid-March as the virus rampaged through neighboring Italy. The death toll in Slovenia remained relatively low: about 1,500 cases and just over 100 deaths. But the right-wing government of Prime Minister Janez Janša has faced criticism, with the opposition accusing him of exploiting the pandemic to silence critics.
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
