Coronavirus Update
Inevitably, there were contrasts.
The beaches in Barcelona were empty as Spain's lockdown continued. But in Florida, where Gov. Ron DeSantis refused to order the beaches closed, sun-seekers partied as if this were just another Spring Break.
More factories shut down -- Hyundai said it would close a plant in the Czech Republic for two weeks, starting Monday. But unemployment offices in at least six American states are hiring. So is the Domino's Pizza chain. It is looking for about 10,000 workers to handle surging delivery and carryout orders.
Chinese parents who once sent their children to study in the West mailed them masks or flew them home. But as China reported a day with no new locally transmitted coronavirus infections, officials fretted that arriving travelers could bring the outbreak back to where it began.
Other nations moved to keep travelers out. Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia not only banned nonresidents from entering his country, but also counseled Australians not to leave, the better to keep the virus from spreading. He called the ban on arrivals ''essential,'' saying he had conferred with Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand, who announced a similar restriction. Separately, Tasmania issued an order that Australians would have to self-isolate for a while after arriving.
In devastated northwestern Syria, doctors believe the coronavirus has swept into displacement camps. Social distancing? As many as a dozen people often live in the same tent. Hand washing? There is not much running water. ''Some people can't wash their kids for a week,'' said Fadi Mesaher of the Maram Foundation for Relief and Development. ''They are living outdoors.''
XXX
China's milestone -- no new local cases, three months after the first case of coronavirus was officially reported -- did not mean that the danger was over. Experts have said that for the outbreak to subside, China would need at least 14 similar days in a row. But the key was the word ''local.'' China still reported 34 cases, but all of them involved people who had arrived from elsewhere.
In Europe, Italy's death toll soared to just over 3,400, surpassing China's. The grief is almost unimaginable. Morgues are inundated, and cemeteries in the northern Italian city of Bergamo are so overwhelmed that the army has been called in to transport bodies elsewhere for cremation.
Britain geared up its response to the pandemic. Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who initially resisted widespread restrictions, said schools would be closed beginning Friday. Some 40 subway stations in London were closed to discourage people from being out and about. Mr. Johnson put 20,000 members of the military on standby.
Queen Elizabeth II retreated to Windsor Castle, 20 miles from Buckingham Palace. The queen and Prince Philip are both in their 90s, which puts them a high-risk category; the palace called the move ''a sensible precaution.''
XXX
Thursday brought fresh evidence of a sharp economic decline, despite efforts in the United States and Europe to counterbalance grim economic numbers: 281,000 new claims for unemployment insurance were filed last week, according to the Labor Department -- up from 211,000 the week before. Wall Street struggled through a volatile day, with stocks closing slightly higher amid worries that more layoffs are coming.
But some already-idled workers could soon be manufacturing something different from what they usually make -- very different. General Motors and Ford told the White House they would be willing to produce ventilators if needed. G.M. said in a statement that the topic came up when its chief executive, Mary T. Barra, called to tell the White House that the company was shuttering its plants temporarily in hopes of keeping the virus from spreading among workers.
Separately, Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla, said on Twitter that his electric car company would also produce ventilators ''if there is a shortage.'' Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York responded almost immediately, saying the city was in the market for ventilators and ''could use your help.'' For now, anyway, Tesla's factory in Fremont, Calif., is open -- and building cars -- despite a county order aimed at curbing nonessential businesses.
And the German conglomerate behind the Nivea and Coppertone brands said it was making medical disinfectant. The company said it would put three plants to work -- two in Germany and one in Spain -- and expected to turn out 500 tons of disinfectant for hospitals, medical staff and emergency responders.
XXX
One sign that the pandemic is changing the way government functions could come from Capitol Hill. For generations, lawmakers have had to be present to vote. They could hedge against a yea or nay by voting ''present,'' but they had to do it by literally setting foot on the House or Senate floor.
Then Representatives Mario Díaz-Balart, Republican of Florida, and Ben McAdams, Democrat of Utah, both disclosed that they had fallen ill. Mr. McAdams did television interviews from home, saying on CBS that the illness began as ''probably the worst cold I've ever had.'' He said he had called his doctor on Saturday and was told his symptoms did not warrant a test. Then he got worse. ''It felt like a belt around my chest,'' he said. That was enough for a test.
On Thursday, House leaders said they would study whether lawmakers could vote from home during the pandemic. They were also looking into limiting the number of House members on the floor at any given moment.
Stephen M. Dickson -- the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, who was pictured shaking hands with Mr. Díaz-Balart at a congressional hearing last week -- went into self-quarantine for a week. ''The smart and constructive thing for me to do is stay home,'' he said, noting that he felt well and had not been tested because he had not shown any symptoms.
XXX
In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo tightened work-from-home rules that were only a day old. He ordered businesses to keep at least 75 percent of their workers at home, up from the 50 percent he announced on Wednesday.
He also said no to martial law as he sought to clarify his position on a potential shelter-in-place measure, which Mayor Bill de Blasio said earlier in the week might be imminent in New York City. He said the current restrictions in New York are ''virtually'' identical to the shelter-in-place rule in effect in Northern California, where people can leave their homes for essential tasks like picking up groceries or medicine.
But Mr. Cuomo wants to call it by a different name.
'''Shelter in place' is a scary term for people, especially when they don't know what it means,'' he said.
