Coronavirus Update
Seven countries, seven days, 1.5 million cases. That many nations -- Argentina, Brazil, Britain, France, India, Russia and the United States -- have reported that many coronavirus cases in the last week, helping to push the total worldwide past 41 million. Some have posted numbers well above what they reported during the worst days in the spring, when stay-at-home orders were widespread. Strategies have changed, with carefully tailored local lockdowns becoming the game plan in most places. But the numbers continue their relentless rise.
In France, which has added 174,273 cases in the past seven days, Paris and eight other regions are living under a curfew. Still, more than 11,000 virus patients are hospitalized, and 2,000 are in intensive care, a threshold that had not been crossed since May. France currently has 5,800 intensive care beds.
Argentines complained of ''quaranternity'' while living through a monthslong lockdown. But lately, as cases have surged again, Argentina passed the million-case mark, making it fifth in the world in total cases. At the opposite end of South America, Colombia -- where almost a third of the country's 965,000 cases are concentrated in Bogotá, the capital -- is seventh. Officials in Colombia said that attacks on medical personnel, from threats and discrimination to assaults that caused injuries, had risen significantly this year and ''to a large extent were against staff caring for patients during the pandemic.'' Among the allegations against doctors, nurses, technicians and ambulance drivers: They themselves were a source of contagion.
In the United States, there have been 421,114 new cases in the last week, indicating that the long-predicted fall wave of the virus is well underway -- and the heart of the outbreak is in the heartland. Midwestern and Rocky Mountain states are fighting major outbreaks as wintry weather arrives early. In Minneapolis, blanketed by a seven-inch snowstorm on Tuesday, officials reported 1,082 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday.
In North Dakota, which leads the nation in cases per capita, the virus is spreading so rapidly that Gov. Doug Burgum deployed 50 National Guard soldiers to alert people who test positive. The soldiers will help work through a backlog of positive test results that the state's overworked contact tracers have been unable to handle. Mr. Burgum called the backlog ''temporary'' but said that it ''required an immediate and significant shift in resources'' in the state, where new cases have increased 83 percent in the last two weeks. The state health department also said that North Dakotans who tested positive would be told to notify people themselves with whom they had been in close contact. Until now, the contact tracers have done that.
North Dakota is one of 16 states that does not have a mask mandate. Another is Alaska, although the state's coronavirus website ''strongly encourages'' mask wearing in public. But Dr. Anne Zink, the state's chief medical officer, has faced challenges convincing residents to do so. Videos from a youth hockey tournament this month in Anchorage showed some parents watching from the stands with their faces uncovered. The Anchorage Health Department announced later it was investigating a ''cluster'' of cases linked to the games.
Case numbers are also climbing in the Northeast, which the virus hit early. In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo eased some localized lockdowns in hot spots in New York City, allowing schools and restaurants to open. But he left them in effect in other neighborhoods at the center of outbreaks in Brooklyn and in Rockland and Orange Counties. And another neighborhood in the city -- Ozone Park, Queens -- was added to the list, as were communities with new clusters along the Pennsylvania border.
Mr. Cuomo said he was confident that the state could focus on what he called ''micro clusters,'' which he said were likely to continue through the fall and winter. ''Because these are so small, these areas, they're going to flare-up,'' he said. ''And then you run and you put them out. The next day, there's another flare-up.''
New Jersey's caseload has increased 49 percent in the last two weeks; on Monday, its seven-day average of new cases passed 1,000 for the first time since May 26. And on Wednesday, Gov. Philip D. Murphy said he was going into quarantine. He walked away from a news conference, saying he had just learned that someone later identified as a member of his senior staff had tested positive.
''I will now unfortunately have to take myself off the field,'' he said before he left, adding that he had felt no symptoms. ''I can't ask President Trump not to come to Bedminster and do a fund-raiser and have me sit here.''
He was referring to a campaign event that the president attended at his Trump National Golf Club on Oct. 1, hours before Mr. Trump tweeted that he had tested positive. On Wednesday, Mr. Murphy said that he had been ''in close proximity'' with the infected person on Saturday. His office said later that he had tested negative on Wednesday.
XXX
Another snapshot of who has been infected showed that Covid-19 cases among children climbed 13 percent from Oct. 1 to Oct. 15. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the Children's Hospital Association -- which compiled data from 49 states, Guam, Puerto Rico, New York City and Washington, D.C. -- said that 84,319 new cases involving children were reported in those two weeks. The two groups said children accounted for 0.27 percent of all coronavirus deaths in early October, based on mortality statistics from 42 states and New York City. Fourteen states said no children had died in that time.
In Boston, where the seven-day average positive test rate has climbed to 5.7 percent from 4.5 percent a week ago, Mayor Martin J. Walsh suspended in-person classes. The city's public schools will switch to all-remote learning starting Thursday. ''We have said all along that we will only provide in-person learning for students if the data and public health guidance supports it,'' Mr. Walsh said, ''and this new data shows that we are trending in the wrong direction.''
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
