Coronavirus, coups, economics: Millions took to streets in 2021
In 2021, the pandemic fueled new protest movements around vaccinations, lockdown measures and covid-19's adverse economic effects. It mobilized the ranks of far-right movements and deepened what some experts describe as a growing libertarian streak. The year also saw pro-democracy demonstrators turn out in droves to resist coups and power grabs.
While economic woes tended to dominate the global protest landscape in decades past, governance issues took center stage in 2021 - a continuation of a recent trend. The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace recorded 72 anti-government protest movements this year through November - down slightly from the same period in 2020 but significantly higher than the pre-pandemic count in 2019.
Concerns about real or perceived subversions of democracy pushed people around the world to mobilize online or take to the streets.
On Jan. 6, President Donald Trump's attacks on the integrity of the United States' voting systems reached a violent climax. The world watched as a pro-Trump mob breached the U.S. Capitol, trapped lawmakers and vandalized the seat of Congress, leaving a trail of broken glass and existential questions in its wake. Five people died during or immediately after the attack, and 140 police officers were assaulted.
On Oct. 25, Sudan's military detained the prime minister and dissolved the government, dealing what many feared would be a fatal blow to the country's fragile democratic transition. Demonstrations against the coup continued through December, with hundreds of thousands of participants demanding civilian rule. Peaceful protests were met with deadly violence from security forces that left at least 45 dead and hundreds wounded.
In November, Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok was reinstated - but protesters weren't satisfied. On Dec. 19, they turned out in huge numbers as rumors swirled that the country's military leaders were on the verge of resignation.
In France, summer weekends brought mass demonstrations against the government's "health pass" system and requirement that health-care workers be vaccinated against the coronavirus. Nurses, restaurant employees and right-wing activists marched and chanted "Freedom!" Extremism experts warned that the demonstrations offered fertile ground for far-right recruitment.
Protests that Indian farmers launched last year against Prime Minister Narendra Modi's effort to liberalize the agricultural sector continued in 2021, sustained by protest camps structured around mutual aid. Tens of thousands of farmers blocked highways outside Delhi and garnered international attention on Twitter. After trying for a year to repress the protests, Modi gave in to farmers' demands in November, apologizing to them and announcing that he would repeal the farm laws. The movement disbanded this month.
claire.parker@washpost.com
