The pandemic could spawn a nutrition crisis for children if school meal programs wither, a U.N. agency warns.
The closing of schools in nearly 200 countries as the coronavirus pandemic took hold last year abruptly deprived hundreds of millions of children of a school meal that, for many, was the only nutritious meal of the day. The United Nations World Food Program warned on Wednesday that with may schools still shut a year later, a decade’s worth of progress in improving children’s nutrition may be at risk of being erased.
“That one meal a day is often the reason hungry children go to school in the first place,” said[https://www.wfp.org/publications/state-school-feeding-worldwide-2020] David Beasley, the executive director of the World Food Program, as the organization released its annual report on school feeding. “It’s also a powerful incentive to make sure they’ll come back after lockdown ends.”
The organization called on governments around the world to maintain or even expand their school meal programs beyond pre-pandemic levels.
Studies[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32619327/] have showed that food insecurity is associated with poor physical and mental health generally, and with reduced participation at school by children. When girls have access to school meals, they tend to stay in school longer, and rates of child marriage and teen pregnancy tend to decline.
Around 1.6 billion children were not able go to classrooms at the peak of the pandemic last year, and 370 million of them were deprived of a school meal as a result, putting them at risk of long-term health issues, according to the World Food Program.
Child food insecurity has become a concern in some developed countries during the pandemic. In Britain, activists like the soccer star Marcus Rashford have pushed the authorities to provide free meals to more children while schools remain closed.
But the risk may be greatest in low-income countries, where the number of children who were receiving school meals grew by 36 percent between 2013 and 2020, the World Food Program said.
“We need to get these programs running again — even better than before — to stop Covid destroying the futures of millions of the world’s most vulnerable children,” Mr. Beasley said.
