Coronavirus Update
Much of the world is now bound by rules intended to keep people away from one another.
India's prime minister gave his 1.3 billion citizens less than four hours' notice before a three-week lockdown began -- ''a total ban on coming out of your homes,'' the prime minister, Narendra Modi, declared on television. South Africa will also begin a three-week lockdown, but not until Thursday.
Mr. Modi, who did not explain how people would get food or essential supplies, warned that India would be set back 21 years if it did not do as he said for the next 21 days. President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa said the measure was necessary to ''avoid a human catastrophe.'' In just over a week, the number of confirmed cases there jumped to 554.
India, which had already moved to isolate itself by blocking international flights and grounding domestic ones, has around 500 reported coronavirus cases -- relatively few, considering the size of its population. The fear is that if the infection were to spread as it has in the United States or Europe, the toll could be far more devastating.
As for the United States, where a patchwork of hastily imposed regulations now governs life in some states but not others, President Trump and Vice President Mike Pence said that a national stay-at-home order had not been considered. Mr. Trump, appearing on Fox News, complained about having to ''close the country.'' He indicated that White House guidelines recommending social distancing and best practices for businesses would be lifted soon because he wanted to have the country ''raring to go by Easter,'' less than three weeks away.
''I think it's possible -- why not?'' he said with a shrug.
But health professionals and other officials doubted that timetable. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, announcing what he described as ''changes in circumstances that are not encouraging,'' said his state's caseload was doubling every three days. That would put the peak of infection in New York sooner than had been expected.
''We haven't flattened the curve,'' Mr. Cuomo said. ''The curve is actually increasing.'' He said the state could need as many as 140,000 hospital beds for coronavirus patients, up from the 110,000 beds projected a few days ago and more than two and a half times the 53,000 now available.
''Those are troubling and astronomical numbers,'' Mr. Cuomo said as he cast New York as the herald for the rest of the country -- ''the canary in the coal mine,'' as he put it.
''Look at us today,'' he warned. ''Where we are today, you will be in four weeks or five weeks or six weeks. We are your future.''
'Light at the end of the tunnel' in Italy
Two weeks after Italy was completely locked down, the number of new cases and deaths declined for the second day in a row. The number of patients hospitalized in Lombardy, the region in northern Italy that was devastated as the virus spread, also declined, by about 175.
''It's not the moment to sing victory,'' said Giulio Gallera, a health official in Lombardy, ''but we finally see light at the end of the tunnel.''
In China, nearly two months of lockdown ended for most of the province of Hubei, where the outbreak began in December. But Wuhan, the provincial capital and the city hit hardest, will remain sealed off for two more weeks.
Some epidemiologists worry that a resumption of daily life, including work and travel, could bring on another round of infection. ''We need to worry about a second wave of the outbreak once restrictions are limited,'' Malik Peiris, chief of virology at the University of Hong Kong, said. ''It is important to be aware of it and monitor it -- and be prepared to reimpose these measures if they become necessary in the future.''
Tokyo Olympics are postponed until 2021
The effects of the pandemic will be felt through the summer, by what will not take place: the Summer Olympics in Tokyo, for example. They were postponed a year, until 2021. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan asked Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee, for the delay and told reporters that Mr. Bach agreed ''100 percent.'' Until then, the International Olympic Committee had resisted deciding to delay or call off the Games, even though just about every sport suspended play as the outbreak widened.
It will be the first time the Olympics have not been held as scheduled for a reason other than war.
With professional sports on hold, teams are feeling the pain of empty arenas. The New Jersey Devils and the Philadelphia 76ers cut salaries for employees making more than $100,000 and put them on a four-day workweek as the franchises deal with the impact of the coronavirus.
Optimism on Wall Street over a rescue plan
Wall Street rallied as congressional leaders closed in on a roughly $2 trillion economic rescue plan. Shares of companies likely to get help from the government -- among them cruise lines, casino operators and airlines -- had a particularly good day: Norwegian Cruise Lines jumped more than 40 percent, and MGM Resorts and American Airlines climbed more than 30 percent each. Delta and United Airlines both closed up 20 percent.
In all, the S&P 500 had its biggest daily gain since 2008, rising more than 9 percent. Stocks in Europe also climbed, led by Germany, where stocks rose more than 10 percent.
But corporations continued to cancel dividends and trim costs. General Motors said it would draw down a $16 billion credit line as it ''aggressively pursued austerity measures.'' Chevron sliced its 2020 capital spending plan by 20 percent, or about $4 billion. Intel suspended its stock buyback plan to conserve cash. So did Nordstrom, which also suspended its quarterly dividend. Ford Motor put planned reopenings of its North American factories on an indefinite hold.
The prognosis from Europe was also grim. Chris Williams, the chief business economist for the London-based research and information company IHS Markit, said business ''collapsed in March to an extent far exceeding that seen even at the height of the global financial crisis.'' He added that ''there's scope for the downturn to intensify further'' if stricter lockdowns become necessary.
When the crisis becomes visible to all
The pandemic crept closer to being less about caseloads and numbers and more about people -- closer to the moment when, as Senator Amy Klobuchar said, ''Everyone's going to know someone.''
The playwright Terrence McNally died of complications of at age 81.
The president of Harvard University, Lawrence S. Bacow, said that he and his wife had tested positive. ''We started experiencing symptoms on Sunday -- first coughs then fevers, chills and muscle aches,'' and contacted their doctors on Monday, he wrote in a letter posted on Harvard's website. They were tested on Tuesday. ''Neither of us knows how we contracted the virus,'' he said, but ''far fewer people crossed our paths recently than is usually the case'' because they had worked from home and limited contact with other people since March 14.
Ms. Klobuchar's husband, John Besser, was initially hospitalized for pneumonia. She said he felt sick about 12 days ago and ''quarantined himself in the apartment'' in Washington. (She said she was in Minnesota at the time.)
''That's where he stayed until he started coughing up the blood,'' she said, ''and then he got the test.''
''As much as I love being on your show,'' she said on the ABC-TV program ''Good Morning America,'' ''I would rather be there with him right now. And I can't do that. All you can do is call and email and text and try to reach the caretakers who are taking care of him.''
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
