Coronavirus Update
It is not exactly a rerun of March or April, although it may seem as if it is. France and Germany became the latest European countries to announce restrictions intended to tamp down the resurgent coronavirus, but they appear less intrusive than the measures adopted in the spring. ''Lockdown lite,'' the German news media called the package of rules announced on Wednesday by Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Some places in the United States also ordered new restrictions, though on a far more limited scale, as President Trump continued to play down the pandemic, complaining on Twitter that ''Covid, Covid, Covid is the unified chant of the Fake News Lamestream Media.'' His tweets on Wednesday followed a news release announcing what were described as the administration's first-term scientific accomplishments, among them, in capital letters, ''ENDING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC.''
The president has also repeatedly contended that the increased case counts are the result of more testing. On Wednesday, Adm. Brett P. Giroir, who leads the government's testing effort, said that testing alone could not explain the higher numbers. ''We are at another critical point in the pandemic response,'' he said on the ''Today'' show on NBC, though he noted that hospitalizations were ''below where we were in July, but that is rising.''
He added: ''We have the tools to combat this. We can control it, but this is a very important time to do it.''
In the United States, where more than 500,000 new coronavirus cases have been tallied in the past week, 26 states are at or close to record numbers for new infections. It took nearly three months to reach the half-million mark at the beginning of the pandemic.
XXX
In Europe, where President Emmanuel Macron of France said his country was being ''overpowered by a second wave,'' the new measures were perhaps inevitable. The virus is defying recent local lockdowns -- although a word like ''defying'' risks anthropomorphizing something that is unseen, unseeing and unable to respect man-made boundaries. It just keeps replicating -- and infecting people. The World Health Organization said that new cases in Europe were ''increasing exponentially.'' The European region, which by the W.H.O.'s definition includes Russia and Israel, accounted for 1.3 million new cases last week, almost half of the new infections reported worldwide in that time, the organization said.
But Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, said the virus was not the only problem in a world that is feeling spent. ''We're dealing with two enemies: with the coronavirus itself and corona fatigue,'' she said. But she added that ''now is not the time to relax.''
So officials moved to reimpose measures aimed at bringing down infection rates and hospitalizations. Intensive-care units in France are full, and one model suggests that hospitalizations are two weeks away from the numbers they reached at the height of the first wave. But Frédéric Valletoux, president of the French Hospital Federation, said on Wednesday that hospitals were in a more precarious situation now than in the spring, because doctors and nurses were still exhausted from the first wave.
But officials are trying to keep schools open and their economies chugging this time around. Starting Friday, France will go into a nationwide lockdown until Dec. 1, with just schools and essential businesses staying open. And in Germany, Ms. Merkel announced that restaurants and bars would close, starting Monday. But she said that supermarkets, stores and schools could stay open -- a more targeted approach than the one taken in the spring. As in France, one goal is to ease the pressure on Germany's health system. Coronavirus hospitalizations in the country have doubled in the past 10 days as new cases climbed past 10,000 a day.
Another goal is to minimize the economic pain of shutting down segments of the economy that bring people together. Germany will compensate the small- and midsize businesses that shut down, which will include theaters and gyms as well as restaurants and bars. The government will cover up to 75 percent of their losses, up to a total of 10 billion euros.
XXX
Bismarck, N.D., adopted a mask mandate little more than 24 hours after Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House coronavirus coordinator, criticized its virus protocols. But the new regulation carries no penalties, and Mayor Steve Bakken, a Republican, voted against it at a City Commission meeting on Tuesday evening after saying that the commission should eliminate bureaucracy, not create it. Dr. Birx visited Bismarck on Monday and said she saw few face coverings and little social distancing,'' a situation she called ''deeply unfortunate.'' She appeared with Gov. Doug Burgum, a Republican who has resisted ordering statewide mask rules.
Another place where masks have been controversial -- Coeur d'Alene, Idaho -- also approved a rule requiring them in public after Mayor Steve Widmyer said that ''doing nothing is not an option.'' He added: ''There's going to be some people out there, they're going to say, 'Oh, Widmyer went against his word because he said he would never mandate.' Situations change, and we're in a much different situation'' than earlier in the pandemic. His city is in Kootenai County, where last week a regional health board voted to repeal a mask requirement.
In Kansas, where most of the state's 105 counties opted out of a mask mandate in July, Gov. Laura Kelly and leaders in the State Legislature put the possibility of a statewide requirement on hold while they press for local mask rules in hot spots. Ms. Kelly, a Democrat who has feuded with Republicans who control the Legislature over how to manage the pandemic, called their agreed-upon approach ''a strategy of engagement.''
XXX
The coronavirus will continue to affect time-honored routines long after Election Day, Thanksgiving and the end-of-year holidays. The Boston Marathon, which was canceled this year for the first time in its 124-year history, will not take place until next fall at the earliest. Tom Grilk, chief executive of the Boston Athletic Association, the group that stages the marathon, said on Wednesday that a specific date would be chosen later.
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
