Coronavirus Update
For a world that weathered 2020 by pinning its hopes on better times ahead, 2021 has brought a troubling reality check. Vaccinations are falling short of their initial targets, case counts are soaring and Europe is edging toward tighter restrictions, country by country.
On Tuesday, a day after Britain announced a full-scale lockdown through March, German leaders agreed to extend their lockdown until at least the end of January. Chancellor Angela Merkel said the extension would be strict and was ''not just a continuation of what we did before Christmas,'' when pre-Christmas shopping was curtailed and family gatherings were discouraged. This time around, get-togethers will be all but impossible: Members of one household cannot meet more than one person from another household. Also, schools, child care centers and museums -- which were allowed to remain open before -- must now close. So must all but the most essential stores.
Britain began its lockdown on a lamentable note: It registered 60,000 cases in a single day, reporting 60,916 cases on Tuesday, 2,100 more than on Monday. One in 50 people in Britain has now been infected with the virus, and officials warned that some restrictions on daily life could still be needed next winter.
For now, Britain's overstretched health service risks being overwhelmed by the new and highly transmissible variant of the virus. More than 40 countries have barred travelers from Britain because of the variant, and on Tuesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York said the United States government should follow suit. ''It's time to stop the half measures,'' he said during a news briefing. ''I mean, right now, you can still get on a plane in London, not even have proof that you have a negative test and merrily come over to New York City and spread the disease. Why? Why is that going on? Why, still, after all these challenges and problems, is this madness still going on?''
Similar Story in U.S.
The outlook in the United States is no more encouraging than in Europe. The nation's case count passed 21 million on Tuesday. Arizona is averaging more than twice as many cases now than it was at its summer peak. In California, more than twice as many Covid-19 patients are hospitalized as a month ago. Some California hospitals have turned gift shops into rooms for patients. But rooms with beds aren't the only hospital essentials in short supply. Dr. Marianne Gausche-Hill, the medical director for Los Angeles County's emergency medical services agency, issued guidelines for administering the ''minimum amount of oxygen necessary'' to keep patients' oxygen saturation level at or just above 90 percent. A level below that is a concern for people with Covid-19.
The frustration over the slow start to mass inoculations could be felt from coast to coast. The California Department of Public Health said that only about a third of the doses received so far had been administered. Gov. Gavin Newsom said that the pace was ''not good enough.'' In New York, Mr. de Blasio said that one day last week, only 200 people were vaccinated in all of the city's public hospitals. In North Carolina, Gov. Roy Cooper said he was sending out the National Guard to accelerate inoculations.
A complicating factor is the calendar. It is time for the first people who were inoculated to roll up their sleeves again, for their second dose. But with coronavirus vaccination drives off to slow starts, can the supply of vaccines be doubled by cutting the doses in half -- or delaying a second dose?
The idea of giving reduced doses first came up in connection with the vaccine from the biotech company Moderna. The question of postponing the second dose was raised for the vaccine developed by Pfizer and its German partner, BioNTech.
As for administering shots with smaller doses, scientists at the National Institutes of Health are analyzing research data. But the analysis, which also involves Moderna and scientists from Operation Warp Speed, the government's vaccine initiative, could take about two months, Dr. John Mascola, the director of the Vaccine Research Center at the N.I.H., said on Tuesday.
He said the analysis had been planned, but it has taken on new urgency amid the push to increase vaccine supplies. It also follows a demurral from the Food and Drug Administration, which would have to approve changes in recommended doses. It said that giving half doses of the Moderna vaccine -- first mentioned on Sunday by Dr. Moncef Slaoui, the head of Operation Warp Speed, on the CBS program ''Face the Nation'' -- would be ''premature and not rooted solidly in the available science.''
As for stretching out the timetable for the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, a group of international experts advising the World Health Organization has advised that it be administered as recommended, in two doses three to four weeks apart. But the advisory group said the second dose could be put off for up to six weeks in countries with limited supplies and rapidly rising caseloads.
''We have to be a bit open to these types of decisions that countries need to make according to their own epidemiological situations,'' Dr. Alejandro Cravioto, the group's chairman, said.
His message was similar to the one from Dr. Jerome Adams, the United States surgeon general, who said states need not adhere strictly to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines about who should be vaccinated first. He said states should ''move quickly to other priority groups'' if health care workers did not claim all the vaccines initially allotted for them. A C.D.C. spokesman, asked about Dr. Adams's comments, said the agency's guidance made it clear that everyone in one priority group did not have to be vaccinated before vaccines were offered to the next group.
But while Louisiana encouraged hospitals with extra doses to begin immunizing people over the age of 70, Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York declined to revise the eligibility list. He said that at the rate the state was receiving vaccine shipments, it would be about four weeks before the vaccinations could move on from health care workers.
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
