Coronavirus Update
The global toll from the coronavirus pandemic continued its relentless rise -- there were 1.4 million confirmed coronavirus infections as of Wednesday, and more than 86,000 deaths in 177 countries -- but the world seemed to be creeping toward easing the restrictions that have redefined life in the last month.
Wuhan, the Chinese city where the coronavirus pandemic started, lifted its lockdown on Wednesday, allowing people to come and go without special authorization for the first time in 76 days. Thousands immediately hopped on trains and planes to leave.
Switzerland plans to lift some restrictions by the end of the month -- President Simonetta Sommaruga did not specify which -- and Croatia will permit open-air markets to reopen in the next few days. Denmark is reopening nurseries and primary schools. The Czech Republic is planning to lift a travel ban. In Austria, where small shops can resume business after Easter, Chancellor Sebastian Kurz wore a face mask and remained behind plexiglass when he announced ''a step-by-step resurrection'' of the economy.
''We are not out of the woods,'' he said.
That is an idea that was echoed by health officials and some governors in the United States --sometimes in the same words. They cautioned that signs of hope that have appeared this week, numbers suggesting the caseload might be leveling off, could be nullified if people went back to their pre-pandemic ways. If they got too close to others. If they did not wash their hands carefully.
''We are flattening the curve because we are rigorous about social distancing, et cetera,'' said Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, the hardest hit state in America, ''so if we continue doing what we're doing then we believe the curve will continue to flatten. But it's not a time to get complacent. It's not a time to do anything different than we've been doing.''
He returned to that point later in a briefing in Albany, declaring that he was ''worried about people saying, 'Well, the number of cases is coming down, it's now safer.' It's not. I'm more afraid of the curve changing because people read something into it that's not there. If you reduce that compliance on social distance, you'll see those numbers go up within days, literally within days.''
But Mr. Cuomo called the trends in hospitalizations and in intensive care unit admissions ''the good news.''
''The bad news isn't just bad, the bad news is actually terrible,'' he said before announcing another one-day record: 779 coronavirus deaths in New York. The state's total for the pandemic rose to 6,268 -- as he noted, more than double the toll at the World Trade Center in the terror attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. He ordered flags in the state flown at half-staff as a tribute.
New York State also has more confirmed coronavirus cases than Italy or Spain, which have been ravaged in the pandemic. Mr. Cuomo cautioned that the death toll could rise even if hospitalization rates continued to fall, because that tally includes people who had been on ventilators for long periods of time.
As bleak as the figures are, they probably understate deaths by hundreds if not thousands: People who die at home without ever having been tested for the virus are often left out of the accounting, at least in New York City.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said there were ''100 to 200 people per day'' in the city who die at home and are presumed to be virus victims. ''This used to be a very, very rare thing in New York City,'' he said, adding that ''the only thing that's changed is Covid-19.''
Before the pandemic, fewer than 25 people in the city died at home on a normal day, said Councilman Mark Levine, chairman of the City Council's health committee, in a tweet.
XXX
Everyone tired of the locked-down life wants to know how long businesses will be closed and how long curfews will remain in effect in the places where they have been imposed. A report from the National Academy of Sciences suggested the pandemic may not fade in warm weather. The report said research on how the coronavirus behaves in hot weather did not give a clear picture of what will happen.
Broadway will still be dark then. The Broadway League, a trade association representing producers and theater owners, said the 41 Broadway theaters would stay closed for at least two more months. But many industry leaders say that a best-case scenario will be reopening after the Fourth of July weekend, and that the curtains might not go up until after Labor Day.
For now, there are hopeful signs in hospitals where codes called on the public address system usually indicate that a patient is in distress. Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan instructed medical teams to call the operator and say ''Code Sun'' when a patient is taken off a ventilator or discharged. That is the cue to play a snippet of the Beatles song ''Here Comes the Sun'' on the same public address system used to call ''Code Blue.'' ''This will stand as a reminder to everyone that the sun is coming,'' three hospital officials said in an email.
XXX
Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain was ''responding to treatment'' but not running the government. He remained in intensive care, although a spokesman said he was stable after three days in St. Thomas' Hospital in London. Downing Street declined to comment on what the treatment was or who was providing it. Mr. Johnson's office said that he was still the head of the government but was not working. Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab, initially asked to stand in for him ''where necessary,'' is now filling in full time.
As far as the coronavirus goes, the rich are no different from anyone else: As many as 150 Saudi royals are infected. Doctors at the elite hospital that treats the Saud clan are preparing as many as 500 beds for an expected influx of royals and those close to them, according to an internal ''high alert'' from hospital officials. The message also said that ailing staff members would be treated elsewhere, to make room for the royals.
In Canada, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau made plans to attend a cabinet meeting for the first time in weeks. He went into isolation on March 13 when his wife, Sophie Gregoire Trudeau, tested positive after returning from a trip to London. She announced on March 28 that she had recovered, but on the advice of health officials, he remained in isolation except to give daily briefings on the front walk outside their residence.
Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.
